Ne vous mariez pas les filles
(Boris Vian - 1956)

Avez-vous vu un homme à poil
Sortir soudain d'la salle de bains
Dégoulinant par tous les poils
Et la moustache pleine de chagrin ?
Avez-vous vu un homme bien laid
En train d'manger des spaghetti
Fourchette au poing, l'air abruti
D'la sauce tomate sur son gilet
Quand ils sont beaux, ils sont idiots
Quand ils sont vieux, ils sont affreux
Quand ils sont grands, ils sont feignants
Quand ils sont p'tits, ils sont méchants
Avez-vous vu un homme trop gros
Extraire ses jambes de son dodo
S'masser l'ventre et s'gratter les tifs
En r'gardant ses pieds l'air pensif ?

Ne vous mariez pas, les filles, ne vous mariez pas
Faites plutôt du cinéma
Restez pucell' chez vot' papa
Dev'nez serveuse chez un bougnat
El'vez des singes, él'vez des chats
Levez la patte à l'Opéra
Vendez des boît' de chocolat
Prenez le voile ou l'prenez pas
Dansez à poil pour les gagas
Soyez radeuse av'nue du Bois
Mais ne vous mariez pas, les filles
Ne vous mariez pas

Avez-vous vu un homme gêné
Rentrer trop tard pour le dîner
Du rouge à lèvres sur son col
Du flageolant dans la guibole
Avez-vous vu au cabaret
Un monsieur qui n'est plus très frais
Se frotter avec insistance
Sur un' petite fleur d'innocence
Quand ils sont bêtes, ils vous embêtent
Quand ils sont forts, ils font du sport
Quand ils sont riches, ils gard'nt l'artiche
Quand ils sont durs, ils vous torturent
Avez-vous vu à votre bras
Un maigrichon aux yeux de rat
Friser ses trois poils de moustache
Et se redresser, l'air bravache

Ne vous mariez pas, les filles, ne vous mariez pas
Mettez vos robes de gala
Allez danser à l'Olympia
Changez d'amant quat' fois par mois
Prenez la braise et gardez-la
Cachez la fraîche sous vos matelas
À cinquante ans ça servira
À vous payer des beaux p'tits gars
Rien dans la tête, tout dans les bras
Ah, la belle vie que ça sera
Si vous n'vous mariez pas, les filles
Si vous n'vous mariez pas

%

Moonchild
(Iron Maiden - Seventh son of a seventh son - 1988)

Seven deadly sins
Seven ways to win
Seven holy paths to hell
And your trip begins

Seven downward slopes
Seven bloodied hopes
Seven are your burning fires
Seven your desires

I am he the born-less one
The fallen angel watching you
Babylon, the scarlet whore
I'll infiltrate your gratitude
Don't you dare to save your son
Kill him now and save the young ones
Be the mother of a birth strangled babe
Be the devils own, Lucifer's my name

Moonchild hear the mandrake scream
Moonchild open the seventh seal

I count the heads of those unborn
The accursed ones I'll find them all
And if you die by your own hand
As a suicide you shall be damned
And if you try to save your soul
I will torment you, you shall not grow old
With every second and passing breath
You'll be so alone your soul will bleed to death

Moonchild hear the mandrake scream
Moonchild open the seventh seal
Moonchild you'll be mine soon child
Moonchild take my hand tonight

The twins they are exhausted, seven is this night
Gemini is rising as the red lips kiss to bite
Seven angels seven demons battle for his soul
When Gabriel lies sleeping, this child was born to die

One more dies one more lives
One baby cries one mother grieves
For all the sins you will commit
You'll beg forgiveness and none I'll give
A web of fear shall be your coat
To clothe you in the night
A lucky escape for you young man
But I'll see you damned in endless night

Moonchild hear the mandrake scream
Moonchild open the seventh seal
Moonchild you'll be mine soon child
Moonchild take my hand tonight

%

Changing of the guards
(Bob Dylan - Street legal - 1978)

Sixteen years
Sixteen banners united over the field
Where the good shepherd grieves
Desperate men, desperate women divided
Spreading their wings 'neath falling leaves.

Fortune calls
I stepped forth from the shadows to the marketplace
Merchants and thieves, hungry for power, my last deal gone down
She's smelling sweet like the meadows where she was born
On midsummer's eve near the tower.

The cold-blooded moon
The captain waits above the celebration
Sending his thoughts to a beloved maid
Whose ebony face is beyond communication
The captain is down but still believing that his love will be repaid.

They shaved her head
She was torn between Jupiter and Apollo
A messenger arrived with a black nightingale
I seen her on the stairs and I couldn't help but follow
Follow her down past the fountain where they lifted her veil.

I stumbled to my feet
I rode past destruction in the ditches
With the stitches still mending beneath a heart-shaped tattoo
Renegade priests and treacherous young witches
Were handing out the flowers that I'd given to you.

The palace of mirrors
Where dog soldiers are reflected
The endless road and the wailing of chimes
The empty rooms where her memory is protected
Where the angel's voices whisper to the souls of previous times.

She wakes him up
Forty-eight hours later the sun is breaking
Near broken chains, mountain laurel and rolling rocks
She's begging to know what measures he now will be taking
He's pulling her down and she's clutching on to his long golden locks.
Gentlemen, he said I don't need your organization, I've shined your shoes
I've moved your mountains and marked your cards
But Eden is burning either brace yourself for elimination
Or else your hearts must have the courage for the changing of the guards.

Peace will come
With tranquillity and splendor on the wheels of fire
But will bring us no reward when her false idols fall
And cruel death surrenders with its pale ghost retreating
Between the King and the Queen of Swords.

%

Cruel sister
(Pentangle - Cruel Sister - 1970)

There lived a lady by the North Sea shore
(Lay the bent to the bonnie broom)
Two daughters were the babes she bore
(Fa la la la la la la la la la)

As one grew bright as is the sun,
So coal black grew the elder one.

A knight came riding to the lady's door,
He'd travelled far to be their wooer.

He courted one with gloves and rings,
But he loved the other above all things.

Oh sister will you go with me
To watch the ships sail on the sea?

She took her sister by the hand
And led her down to the North Sea strand.

And as they stood on the windy shore
The dark girl threw her sister o'er.

Sometimes she sank, sometimes she swam,
Crying, "Sister, reach to me your hand!

"Oh Sister, Sister, let me live,
And all that's mine I'll surely give."

"(It's) your own true love that I'll have and more,
But thou shalt never come ashore."

And there she floated like a swan,
The salt sea bore her body on.

Two minstrels walked along the strand
And saw the maiden float to land.

They made a harp of her breastbone,
Whose sound would melt a heart of stone.

They took three locks of her yellow hair,
And with them strung the harp so rare.

They went into her father's hall
To play the harp before them all,

But when they laid it on a stone
The harp began to play alone.

The first string sang a doleful sound:
"The bride her younger sister drowned."

The second string as that they tried,
In terror sits the black-haired bride.

The third string sang beneath their bow,
"And surely now her tears will flow".

%

This is Halloween
(Dany Elfman - The nightmare before Christmas - 1993)

Boys and girls of every age
Wouldn't you like to see something strange

Come with us and you will see
This our town of Halloween

This is Halloween This is Halloween
Pumpkins scream in the dead of night

This is Halloween, everybody make a scene
Trick or treat 'til the neighbors gonna die of fright
Everybody scream!
In our town of halloween
I am the one hiding under your bed
Teeth ground sharp and eyes glowing red

I am the one hiding under your stairs
Fingers like snakes and spiders in my hair

This is Halloween This is Halloween
Halloween! Halloween! Halloween!

In this town we call home
Everyone hail to the pumpkin song

In this town, don't we love it now
Everyone's waiting for the next surprise

Round that corner man, hiding in the trash can
Something's waiting now to pounce and how'll you'll

Scream! This is Halloween
Red 'n Black and slimy green

Aren't you scared?

Well that's just fine
Say it once say it twice
Take a chance and roll the dice
Ride with the moon in the dead of night

Everybody scream! Everybody scream!

In our town of halloween

I am the clown with the tear-away face
Here in a flash and gone without a trace

I am the 'who' when you call 'whos there? '
I am the wind blowing through your hair

I am the shadow on the moon at night
Filling your dreams to the brim with fright

This Halloween This is Halloween
Halloween! Halloween! Halloween!

Tender lumplings everywhere
Life's no fun without a good scare

That's our job, but we're not mean
In our town of Halloween

In this town...

Don't we love it now?

Everyone's waiting for the next surprise!

Skeleton Jack might catch you in the back
And scream like a banshee
Make you jump out of your skin
This is Halloween, everybody scream
Would you please make way for very special guy

Our man Jack is king of the Pumpkin Patch
Everyone hail to the Pumpkin King now

This is Halloween This Halloween
Halloween! Halloween! Halloween!

In this town we call home
Everyone hail to the pumpkin song

Yay!

%

Fugazi
(Marillion - Fugazi - 1984)

Vodka intimate, an affair with isolation in a Blackheath cell
Extinguishing the fires in a private hell
Provoking the heartache to renew the licence
Of a bleeding heart poet in a fragile capsule
Propping up the crust of the glitter conscience
Wrapped in the christening shawl of a hangover
Baptised in the tears from the real

Drowning in the liquid seize on the Piccadilly line, rat race
Scuttling through the damp electric labyrinth
Caress Ophelia's hand with breathstroke ambition
An albatross in the marrytime tradition
Sheathed within the Walkman wear the halo of distortion
Aural contraceptive aborting pregnant conversation
She turned the harpoon and it pierced my heart
She hung herself around my neck
From the Time-Life-Guardians in their conscience bubbles
Safe and dry in my sea of troubles
Nine to five with suitable ties
Cast adrift as their side-show, peepshow, stereo hero
Becalm bestill, bewitch, drowning in the real

The thief of Baghdad hides in Islington now
Praying deportation for his sacred cow
A legacy of romance from a twilight world
The dowry of a relative mystery girl
A Vietnamese flower, a Dockland union
A mistress of release from a magazine's thighs
Magdalenes contracts more than favours
The feeding hands of western promise hold her by the throat

A son of a swastika of '45 parading a peroxide standard
Graffiti conjure disciples testaments of hatred
Aerosol wands whisper where the searchlights trim the barbed wire hedges
This is Brixton chess
A knight for Embankment folds his newspaper castle
A creature of habit, begs the boatman's coin
He'll fade with old soldiers in the grease stained roll call
And linger with the heartburn of Good Friday's last supper

Son watches father scan obituary columns in search of absent school friends
While his generation digests high fibre ignorance
Cowering behind curtains and the taped up painted windows
Decriminalised genocide, provided door to door Belsens
Pandora's box of holocausts gracefully cruising satellite infested heavens
Waiting, the season of the button, the penultimate migration
Radioactive perfumes, for the fashionably, for the terminally insane, insane
Do you realise? Do you realise?
Do you realise, this world is totally fugazi

Where are the prophets, where are the visionaries, where are the poets
To breach the dawn of the sentimental mercenary

%

J'accuse
(Damien Saez - J'accuse - 2010)

Faut du gasoil dans la bagnole,
La carte bleue dans la chatte,
Faut de la dinde pour noël,
Faut bronzer pendant les vacances
Faut du forfait faut du forfait,
Pour oublier la solitude,
Faut des gonzesses à la télé,
Ouais faut des pilules pour bander,
Faut du gazon dans les tabacs,
Il faudrait arrêter d'fumer,
La salle de sport sur des machines,
Faut s'essouffler faut s'entraîner,
Faut marcher dans les clous,
Faut pas boire au volant,
Faut dépenser les p'tits sous,
Faut du réseau pour les enfants,
Faut ressembler à des guignols,
Faut que tu passes à la télé,
Pour rentrer dans les farandoles,
De ceux qui ont le blé...
J'me balade dans les grandes surfaces,
J'ai pas assez mais faut payer,
Je cours au gré des accessoires
Et des conneries illimitées,

Les gens parlent mal les gens sont cons,
Au moins tout aussi cons que moi,
A se faire mettre à s'faire baiser,
Sûr de s'faire enfanter
Des bébés par des hologrammes,
Des mots d'amour par satellite,
Mais ces connards ils savent pas lire,
Ils savent même pas se nourrir,
Des OGM dans les biberons,
Ouais c'est tant mieux ça f'ra moins de cons,
Quand ils crèveront en mutation,
Des grippes porcines sur des cochons.

Oh non l'homme descend pas du singe,
Il descend plutôt du mouton,
Oh non l'homme descend pas du singe,
Il descend plutôt du mouton...

Faut marcher dans les clous,
Faut pas boire au volant,
Faut dépenser ses p'tits sous,
Faut du réseau pour tes enfants,
Faut ressembler à des guignols,
Faut passer à la télé,
Faut rentrer dans les farandoles
De ceux qui font le blé...

Il parait qu'il faut virer les profs,
Et puis les travailleurs sociaux,
Les fonctionnaires qui servent à rien,
Les infirmières à 1000 euros,
Faut qu'ça rapporte aux actionnaires,
La santé et les hôpitaux,
Va t'faire soigner en Angleterre,
Va voir la gueule de leurs métros,
Faut qu'on se fasse une raison,
On a loupé nos transactions,
On s'est laissés prendre le cul,
Par nos besoins nos religions,
Il faut foutre le portables aux chiottes,
Et des coup d'pioche dans la télé,
Faut mettre les menottes
A chaque présentateur du JT...

J'accuse!
Au mégaphone dans l'assemblée!
J'accuse! J'accuse! J'accuse!
Au mégaphone dans l'assemblée!

Faut du gasoil dans la bagnole,
La carte bleue dans la chatte,
Faut de la dinde pour noël,
Faut bronzer pendant les vacances
Faut du forfait faut du forfait,
Faudrait de l'herbe dans les tabacs,
La salle de sport sur des machines,
Faut s'essouffler faut s'entraîner,
J'me balade dans les grandes surfaces,
J'ai pas assez mais faut payer,
Je cours au gré des accessoires,
Et des conneries illimitées,
J'me balade dans les grandes surfaces,
J'ai pas assez mais faut payer,
Je cours au gré des accessoires,
Et des conneries illimitées...

%

Loterie
(Fauve - Vieux Frères, partie 1 - 2014)

De ma fenêtre je vois les élèves du lycée Rodin qui sortent de cours en poussant des cris de joie
Les garçons paradent ils ont l'air pleins de sève et les leggings des filles serrent leurs jambes et leurs fesses encore fermes
J'aurais bien aimé connaître le lycée public apprendre la vie au bon moment être à l'aise un peu couillu et effronté faire ma puberté dans les temps
Piquer des trucs dans les supermarchés perdre mon pucelage tôt me prendre des droites et en donner quelques-unes en retour sans m'écraser

Mais ça a pas été le cas non loin de là moi j'étais plutôt de ceux qui rasent les murs qui font pas de vagues un genre de grenade
Un gentil petit collabo coincé du cul et peureux comme y a pas qui fait tout bien comme on lui demande qui se lève tôt se couche tôt et travaille quand il faut
Mes parents m'ont pas forcé j'ai fait ça tout seul comme un grand puis je me suis obstiné durant des années forcément ça a fini par me jouer des tours
Depuis j'essaie de faire avec j'essaie de faire dévier le sillon ce sera pas facile non heureusement je suis pas seul pour faire taire la voix qui me répète :

« Tu seras lâche et impuissant résigné soumis déprimant insuffisant pas adapté spectateur dans le fossé
Tu seras tout seul divorcé sans enfants remarié alcoolo adultère fils indigne mauvais frère
Tu seras amer trop sévère malheureux toujours en colère méprisable imbuvable égoïste insupportable
Tu seras ce qu'on te dit tu discutes pas ici-bas c'est comme ça
T'as compris le jeu petit merdeux ? C'est la roulette tu choisis pas »

Ah ouais ? Tu crois ça ?
Et bah écoute je sais pas pour toi mais pour moi ce sera
La tête haute un poing sur la table et l'autre en l'air fais-moi confiance avant de finir six pieds sous terre
J'aurai vécu tout ce qu'il y a à vivre et j'aurai fait tout ce que je peux faire
Tenté tout ce qu'il y a à tenter et surtout j'aurai aimé

De ma fenêtre je vois les gens qui partent au taff il y en a qui ont fière allure avec leurs beaux manteaux et leurs belles chaussures
D'autres au contraire ont l'air de ramasser sévère toutes celles et ceux qui s'en vont une fois de plus servir la soupe aux autres
Ma conscience de petit blanc me rattrape aussitôt : « Tu vois ? Tu devrais arrêter de te plaindre »
Et pourtant je ne sais pas est-ce que c'est nous qui sommes devenus des baltringues ou bien est-ce que c'est le monde qui part en vrille ?
Parfois je me dis qu'on nous a tellement habitués au goût de la culpabilité qu'on est devenus incapables d'y voir clair

Par exemple moi pendant longtemps je me suis acharné à me ranger dans une boîte à avoir une vie normale sans accrocs sans risques sans drames
Avoir un métier normal un salaire normal des sentiments normaux une femme normale une mort normale etc, etc.
Mais j'ai pas pu c'était trop pour moi j'étais pas assez endurant alors à la place j'ai cherché une feinte pour vivre dignement et aujourd'hui je me saigne

Pour essayer d'aider les miens de la bonne façon d'agir selon des nobles fins et un jour enfin donner tort à cette voix qui me répète :

« Tu seras dominant ou noyé écrasant ou écrasé carnassier ou dispensable gagnant ou donnée négligeable
Tu seras semblable à tes semblables comme tout le monde ou dégradable plus malin ou trou du cul tortionnaire ou corrompu
Tu seras battu et silencieux ou bien cruel mais victorieux rigoureux ou inutile féroce ou détail futile
Tu seras ce qu'on te dit tu discutes pas ici-bas c'est comme ça
T'as compris le jeu petit merdeux ? C'est la roulette tu choisis pas »

Ah ouais ? Tu crois ça ?
Et bah écoute je sais pas pour toi mais pour moi ce sera
La tête haute un poing sur la table et l'autre en l'air fais-moi confiance avant de finir six pieds sous terre
J'aurai vécu tout ce qu'il y a à vivre et j'aurai fait tout ce que je peux faire
Tenté tout ce qu'il y a à tenter et surtout et surtout j'aurai aimé

De ma fenêtre, je vois un bout de l'enceinte de l'hôpital
Si je penche un peu la tête je peux peut-être arriver à voir le bâtiment des consultations
Je repense à toutes ces fois où on m'a dit : « T'es trop sensible mais ça va aller fais pas cette tête... Bon OK ce sera pas tous les jours la fête »
Et le docteur de la tête qui me répète que c'est comme ça qu'il faut que je l'accepte que c'est comme le diabète qui faut vivre avec
Alors j'essaie chaque jour que Dieu fait et j'ai pas dit mon dernier mot t'inquiète y a rien d'écrit et nique la voix qui me dit :

« Tu seras schizo bipolaire trop fragile suicidaire tyrannique incurable repoussant pas regardable
Tu seras sadique narcissique voyeur pervers égocentrique destructeur dépressif obsessionnel compulsif
Tu seras damné condamné étendu sur la chaussée déformé mal branlé démoli trois fois rejeté
Tu seras ce qu'on te dit tu discutes pas ici-bas c'est comme ça
T'as compris le jeu petit merdeux ? C'est la roulette tu choisis pas »

Ah ouais ? Tu crois ça ?
Et bah écoute je sais pas pour toi mais pour moi ce sera
La tête haute les couilles sur la table le poing en l'air fais-moi confiance avant de finir six pieds sous terre
J'aurai vécu tout ce qu'il y a à vivre et j'aurai fait tout ce que je peux faire
Tenté tout ce qu'il y a à tenter et surtout on m'aura aimé

%

Impossible
(La rue Kétanou - Ouvert à double tour - 2003)

C'était bien à Ménilmontant qu'on avait l'impression de descendre
Et tel que c'était parti c'était pas fait pour revenir
On était des vrais aveugles avec les idées claires
Aujourd'hui impossible d'arrêter cette chanson

D'ailleurs est-ce vraiment une chanson ou juste l'espoir d'une évasion
D'un monde qui tourne si bien avec de l'imagination
Avant qu'on se casse d'ici je reste pour casser des verres
Rattrapez ceux qui fuient la vie et dites-leur qu'on reste ouvert

Y'en a qui trouvent ça joli parce qu'on a le droit de dire merde
Ca revendique à moitié prix rebelle en herbe, veut protested
Universelle que l'on veut pour continuer une chanson
Il faudra pas fermer les yeux pour qu'on fasse encore des prisons

Est-ce qu'on a des têtes d'affiches on vous l'demande sans déconner
Même si on s'arrache la gueule à gueuler qu'il faut s'accrocher
S'accrocher des oreilles au coeur pour que l'on puisse enfin s'entendre
Rire du pire et du meilleur et sourit qui veut bien l'entendre

Ne pissez pas sur le piano il n'y pousse plus de chansonnette
Si on le trouve un peu trop haut on peut toujours lui faire sa fête (ouais lui scier les pieds)
Et on chantera ici-bas pour continuer sans oublier
Que la guerre va faire un tabac et qu'on pourra l'enregistrer

Allez déballe sur le comptoir pour un peu on file une étoile
Qu'on continue le tintamarre pour un petit bout de maroilles
Allez déballe vide ton sac qu'on puisse le remplir d'ailleurs
De toutes façons y'a une arnaque en tout cas elle court la rumeur

Les chansons n'appartiennent qu'à ceux qui les laissent s'envoyager
Pour qu'on puisse encore les chanter sans qu'elles aient besoin de papier
Et tout le monde pourra les entendre si nos oreilles sont accrochées
Aux coeurs qui battent la mesure du temps qui ne veut pas s'arrêter

On était des vrais aveugles avec les idées claires
Aujourd'hui impossible d'arrêter cette chanson

Mais impossible n'est pas français!

%

A ma femme endormie
(Charles Cros - Musique: Sarclo - Sarclosolo - 1991)

Tu dors en croyant que mes vers
Vont encombrer tout l'univers
De désastres et d'incendies ;
Elles sont si rares pourtant
Mes chansons au soleil couchant
Et mes lointaines mélodies.

Mais si je dérange parfois
La sérénité des cieux froids,
Si des sons d'acier ou de cuivre
Ou d'or, vibrent dans mes chansons,
Pardonne ces hautes façons,
C'est que je me hâte de vivre.

Et puis tu m'aimeras toujours.
Éternelles sont les amours
Dont ma mémoire est le repaire ;
Nos enfants seront de fiers gars
Qui répareront les dégâts,
Que dans ta vie a faits leur père.

Ils dorment sans rêver à rien,
Dans le nuage aérien
Des cheveux sur leurs fines têtes ;
Et toi, près d'eux, tu dors aussi,
Ayant oublié, le souci
De tout travail, de toutes dettes.

Moi je veille et je fais ces vers
Qui laisseront tout l'univers
Sans désastre et sans incendie ;
Et demain, au soleil montant
Tu souriras en écoutant
Cette tranquille mélodie.

%

Smoke on the Water
(Deep purple - Machine Head - 1972)

We all came out to Montreux
On the Lake Geneva shoreline
To make records with a mobile
We didn't have much time
Frank Zappa and the Mothers
Were at the best place around
But some stupid with a flare gun
Burned the place to the ground

Smoke on the water, a fire in the sky
Smoke on the water

They burned down the gambling house
It died with an awful sound
Funky Claude was running in and out
Pulling kids out the ground
When it all was over
We had to find another place
But Swiss time was running out
It seemed that we would lose the race

Smoke on the water, a fire in the sky
Smoke on the water

We ended up at the Grand Hotel
It was empty, cold and bare
But with the Rolling truck Stones thing just outside
Making our music there
With a few red lights, a few old beds
We made a place to sweat
No matter what we get out of this
I know, I know we'll never forget

Smoke on the water, a fire in the sky
Smoke on the water

%

A horse with no name
(America - America - 1971)

On the first part of the journey
I was looking at all the life
There were plants and birds and rocks and things
There was sand and hills and rings
The first thing I met was a fly with a buzz
And the sky with no clouds
The heat was hot and the ground was dry
But the air was full of sound

I've been through the desert on a horse with no name
It felt good to be out of the rain
In the desert you can remember your name
'Cause there ain't no one for to give you no pain

After two days in the desert sun
My skin began to turn red
After three days in the desert fun
I was looking at a river bed
And the story it told of a river that flowed
Made me sad to think it was dead

You see I've been through the desert on a horse with no name
It felt good to be out of the rain
In the desert you can remember your name
'Cause there ain't no one for to give you no pain

After nine days I let the horse run free
'Cause the desert had turned to sea
There were plants and birds and rocks and things
there was sand and hills and rings
The ocean is a desert with it's life underground
And a perfect disguise above
Under the cities lies a heart made of ground
But the humans will give no love

You see I've been through the desert on a horse with no name
It felt good to be out of the rain
In the desert you can remember your name
'Cause there ain't no one for to give you no pain

%

Tennesse stud
(Jimmy Driftwood - 1959)

Back about eighteen and twenty-five
I left Tennessee very much alive
I never would've made it through the Arkansas mud
If I hadn't been riding on the Tennessee Stud

Had some trouble with my sweetheart's Pa
One of her brothers was a bad outlaw
I wrote a letter to my Uncle Spud And
I rode away on the Tennessee Stud

The Tennessee Stud was long and lean
The color of the sun and his eyes were green
He had the nerve and he had the blood
There never was a horse like Tennessee Stud

Drifted on down into no man's land
Across the river called the Rio Grande
Raced my horse with the Spaniard's foe
Til I got me a skin full of silver and gold

Me and the gambler, we couldn't agree
We got in a fight over Tennessee
Pulled our guns and he fell with a thud
And I rode away on a Tennessee Stud

The Tennessee Stud was long and lean
The color of the sun and his eyes were green
He had the nerve and he had the blood
There was never a horse like the Tennessee Stud

I rode right back across Arkansas
I whipped her brother and I whipped her Pa
I found that girl with the golden hair
She was riding on a Tennessee Mare

Pretty little baby on the cabin floor
Little horse colt playing round the door
I loved the girl with the golden hair
And the Tennessee Stud loves the Tennessee Mare

The Tennessee Stud was long and lean
The color of the sun and his eyes were green
He had the nerve and he had the blood
There was never a horse like the Tennessee Stud

%

Faut s'oublier
(Damien Saez - Messina - 2014)

Entre le marteau et l'enclume
Entre la rue et la fortune
Entre le triste du trottoir
Entre le vin et l'illusoire
Entre les goudrons et le ciel
Les tourtereaux, les tourterelles
Entre les taxis sur leur terre
Entre tes os et puis ma chair
Entre nos corps et puis nos coeurs
Entre ton rire et puis mes pleurs
Entre les chats blancs, les chats noirs
Entre les verres et les comptoirs
Entre l'ivresse et les sanglots
Entre les caresses et les crocs
Les passants miséricordieux
Entre les fois et les bons dieux
Entre nos crimes et puis nos cris
Et c'est fini les infinis
Entre la cuillère et la drogue
Sur les boulevards vont nos pirogues
Entre nous deux, entre les feux
Entre les non-dits de tes yeux
Entre les coups, entre les clous
Entre les fous puis entre nous
Entre le printemps et l'hiver
Ce qui nous blesse, ce qui est cher
Entre les fêtes et les défaites
Entre les temps et les tempêtes
Entre les je t'aime et les mots
Qui font chavirer nos bateaux
Entre l'océan et la plage
Entre la plume et puis la page

Faut s'oublier
S'évader
Se réchauffer avec des mots d'amour
S'oublier
Se déchirer
S'embrasser comme au dernier jour

Ici c'est le règne des choses
A bouffer jusqu'aux overdoses
Mais si ces deux-là s'en foutent
Puisque s'aimer jamais ne coûte
Dans les rues aux mauvaises étoiles
Sur les avenues, bateaux sans voiles
Les ivrognes aiment bien naviguer
Comme des soleils aux champs de blé
Et si nos yeux aiment bien pleurer
C'est parce-que nous, nous aimons nous aimer

Nous oublier
Nous évader
Nous embrasser comme au dernier jour
Nous oublier
Nous déchirer
Nous réchauffer avec des mots d'amour

Entre les deux amants c'est la rue qui s'incline
S'ils n'ont pas d'argent, c'est la pluie orpheline
Ils font les enfants qui sauveront le monde
Ils durent au présent puisqu'à chaque seconde
Ils se disent des choses qui font tourner les terres
Il n'y a jamais de pauses à leurs chants des mystères
Ils sont beaux, ils sont laids, leurs cheveux pleins de poux
Et pourtant qu'ils sont beaux, ceux qui n'ont pas le sou
Et si toi tu veux avec moi, oui, danser comme eux
Sur les toits sans l'abri, avec moi si tu veux
Devenir roi du ciel, et toi reine d'un jour
Au lever du soleil, pour sauver notre amour

Faut s'oublier
Faut s'évader
S'embrasser comme au premier jour
Faut s'oublier
Se déchirer
Se réchauffer avec des mots d'amour
Nous oublier
Nous évader
Nous embrasser comme au premier jour

%

Alligators 427
(Hubert-Félix Thiéfaine - Autorisation de délirer - 1979)

Alligators 427
Aux ailes de cachemire safran,
Je grille ma dernière cigarette.
Je vous attends.
Sur cette autoroute hystérique
Qui nous conduit chez les mutants,
J'ai troqué mon coeur contre une trique.
Je vous attends.
Je sais que vous avez la beauté destructive
Et le sourire vainqueur jusqu'au dernier soupir.
Je sais que vos mâchoires distillent l'agonie.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort!"

Alligators 427
À la queue de zinc et de sang,
Je m'tape une petite reniflette.
Je vous attends.
Dans cet étrange carnaval
On a vendu l'homo sapiens
Pour racheter du Neandertal.
Je vous attends.
Et les manufactures ont beau se recycler,
Y aura jamais assez de morphine pour tout le monde,
Surtout qu'à ce qu'on dit, vous aimez faire durer.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort!"

Alligators 427
Aux longs regards phosphorescents,
Je mouche mon nez, remonte mes chaussettes.
Je vous attends.
Et je bloque mes lendemains.
Je sais que les mouches s'apprêtent,
Autour des tables du festin.
Je vous attends.
Et j'attends que se dressent vos prochains charniers.
J'ai raté l'autre guerre pour la photographie.
J'espère que vos macchabées seront bien faisandés.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort!"

Alligators 427
Aux crocs venimeux et gluants,
Je donne un coup de brosse à mon squelette.
Je vous attends.
L'idiot du village fait la queue
Et tend sa carte d'adhérent
Pour prendre place dans le grand feu.
Je vous attends.
J'entends siffler le vent au-dessus des calvaires
Et je vois les vampires sortir de leurs cercueils
Pour venir saluer les anges nucléaires.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort!"

Alligators 427
Aux griffes d'or et de diamant,
Je sais que la ciguë est prête.
Je vous attends.
Je sais que dans votre alchimie,
L'atome ça vaut des travellers chèques
Et ça suffit comme alibi.
Je vous attends.
A l'ombre de vos centrales, je crache mon cancer.
Je cherche un nouveau nom pour ma métamorphose.
Je sais que mes enfants s'appelleront vers de terre.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort!"

Alligators 427
Au cerveau de jaspe et d'argent,
Il est temps de sonner la fête.
Je vous attends.
Vous avez le goût du grand art
Et sur mon compteur électrique,
J'ai le portrait du prince-ringard.
Je vous attends.
Je sais que, désormais, vivre est un calembour.
La mort est devenue un état permanent.
Le monde est aux fantômes, aux hyènes et aux vautours.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort!"

%

Life on Mars
(David Bowie - Hunky Dory - 1979)

It's a God-awful small affair
To the girl with the mousy hair
But her mummy is yelling no
And her daddy has told her to go

But her friend is nowhere to be seen
Now she walks through her sunken dream
To the seat with the clearest view
And she's hooked to the silver screen

But the film is a saddening bore
For she's lived it ten times or more
She could spit in the eyes of fools
As they ask her to focus on

Sailors fighting in the dance hall
Oh man, look at those cavemen go
It's the freakiest show
Take a look at the lawman
Beating up the wrong guy
Oh man, wonder if he'll ever know
He's in the best selling show
Is there life on Mars?

It's on America's tortured brow
That Mickey Mouse has grown up a cow
Now the workers have struck for fame
'Cause Lennon's on sale again

See the mice in their million hordes
From Ibiza to the Norfolk Broads
Rule Britannia is out of bounds
To my mother, my dog, and clowns

But the film is a saddening bore
'Cause I wrote it ten times or more
It's about to be writ again
As I ask you to focus on

Sailors fighting in the dance hall
Oh man, look at those cavemen go
It's the freakiest show
Take a look at the lawman
Beating up the wrong guy
Oh man, wonder if he'll ever know
He's in the best selling show
Is there life on Mars?

%

Sentimental
(Porcupine tree - Fear of a blank planet - 2007)

Never want to be old
And I don't want dependence
It's no fun to be told
That you can't blame your parents anymore

I'm finding it hard
To hang from a star
Don't want to be
Never want to be old

Sullen and bored the kids stay
And in this way they wish away each day?
Stoned in the mall the kids play
And in this way wish away each day?

I don't really know
If I care what is normal
And I'm not really sure
If the pills I've been taking are helping

I'm wasting my life
Hurting inside
I don't really know
And I'm not really sure

Sullen and bored the kids stay
And in this way they wish away each day?
Stoned in the mall the kids play
And in this way wish away each day?

%

Eleanor Rigby
(The Beatles - Revolver - 1966)

Eleanor Rigby, picks up the rice
in the church where a wedding has been
Lives in a dream
Waits at the window, wearing the face
that she keeps in a jar by the door
Who is it for

All the lonely people
Where do they all come from?
All the lonely people
Where do they all belong?

Father McKenzie, writing the words
of a sermon that no one will hear
No one comes near
Look at him working, darning his socks
in the night when there's nobody there
What does he care

All the lonely people
Where do they all come from?
All the lonely people
Where do they all belong?

Ah, look at all the lonely people
Ah, look at all the lonely people

Eleanor Rigby, died in the church
and was buried along with her name
Nobody came
Father McKenzie, wiping the dirt
from his hands as he walks from the grave
No one was saved

All the lonely people
Where do they all come from?
All the lonely people
Where do they all belong?

%

Sympathy for the devil
(The Rolling Stones - Beggars banquet - 1968)

Please allow me to introduce myself
I'm a man of wealth and taste
I've been around for a long, long year
Stole many a man's soul and faith
And I was 'round when Jesus Christ
Had his moment of doubt and pain
Made damn sure that Pilate
Washed his hands and sealed his fate

Pleased to meet you, hope you guess my name
But what's puzzling you is the nature of my game

I stuck around St. Petersburg
When I saw it was a time for a change
Killed the Czar and his ministers
Anastasia screamed in vain
I rode a tank, held a general's rank
When the Blitzkrieg raged and the bodies stank

Pleased to meet you, hope you guess my name
But what's puzzling you is the nature of my game

I watched with glee while your kings and queens
Fought for ten decades for the gods they made
I shouted out, "Who killed the Kennedys?"
When after all, it was you and me
Let me please introduce myself
I'm a man of wealth and taste
And I laid traps for troubadours
Who get killed before they reach Bombay

Pleased to meet you, hope you guess my name
But what's puzzling you is the nature of my game

Oh yeah, get down heavy!

Pleased to meet you, hope you guess my name, oh yeah
But what's confusin' you is just the nature of my game

Just as every cop is a criminal
And all the sinners saints
As heads is tails, just call me Lucifer
Cause I'm in need of some restraint
So if you meet me, have some courtesy
Have some sympathy, and some taste
Use all your well-learned politesse
Or I'll lay your soul to waste

Pleased to meet you, hope you guessed my name
But what's puzzling you is the nature of my game

%

Suzanne
(Leonard Cohen - Songs of Leonard Cohen - 1967)

Suzanne takes you down to her place near the river
You can hear the boats go by, you can spend the night forever
And you know that she's half-crazy but that's why you want to be there
And she feeds you tea and oranges that come all the way from China
And just when you mean to tell her that you have no love to give her
Then he gets you on her wavelength
And she lets the river answer that you've always been her lover

And you want to travel with her, and you want to travel blind
And you know that she will trust you
For you've touched her perfect body with your mind

And Jesus was a sailor when he walked upon the water
And he spent a long time watching from his lonely wooden tower
And when he knew for certain only drowning men could see him
He said all men will be sailors then until the sea shall free them
But he himself was broken, long before the sky would open
Forsaken, almost human, he sank beneath your wisdom like a stone

And you want to travel with him, and you want to travel blind
And you think you maybe you'll trust him
For he's touched your perfect body with her mind

Now, Suzanne takes your hand and she leads you to the river
She's wearing rags and feathers from Salvation Army counters
And the sun pours down like honey on our lady of the harbor
And she shows you where to look among the garbage and the flowers
There are heroes in the seaweed, there are children in the morning
They are leaning out for love and they will lean that way forever
While Suzanne holds her mirror

And you want to travel with her, and you want to travel blind
And you know that you can trust her
For she's touched your perfect body with her mind

%

Aucun Express
(Alain Bashung - Fantaisie militaire - 1998)

Aucun express ne m'emmènera
Vers la félicité
Aucun tacot n'y accostera
Aucun Concorde n'aura ton envergure
Aucun navire n'y va
Sinon toi

Aucun trolley ne me tiendra
Si haut perché
Aucun vapeur ne me fera fondre
Des escalators au chariot ailé
J'ai tout essayé
J'ai tout essayé

J'ai longé ton corps
Épousé ses méandres
Je me suis emporté
Transporté
Par delà les abysses
Par dessus les vergers
Délaissant les grands axes
J'ai pris la contre-allée
Je me suis emporté
Transporté

Aucun landau ne me laissera
Bouche bée
Aucun Valhalla ne vaut le détour
Aucun astronef ne s'y attarde
Aucun navire n'y va
Sinon toi

J'ai longé ton corps
Épousé ses méandres
Je me suis emporté
Transporté
Par delà les abysses
Par dessus les vergers
Délaissant les grands axes
J'ai pris la contre-allée
Je me suis emporté
Transporté

Aucun express ne m'emmènera vers
la félicité
Aucun tacot n'y accostera
Aucun Concorde n'aura ton envergure
Aucun navire n'y va
Aucun

J'ai longé ton corps
Épousé ses méandres
Je me suis emporté
Transporté
Par delà les abysses
Par dessus les vergers
Délaissant les grands axes
J'ai pris la contre-allée
Je me suis emporté
Transporté

%

Space oddity
(David Bowie - Space oddity - 1969)

Ground Control to Major Tom
Ground Control to Major Tom
Take your protein pills and put your helmet on
Ground Control to Major Tom (ten, nine, eight, seven, six)
Commencing countdown, engines on (five, four, three)
Check ignition and may God's love be with you (two, one, liftoff)

This is Ground Control to Major Tom
You've really made the grade
And the papers want to know whose shirts you wear
Now it's time to leave the capsule if you dare

"This is Major Tom to Ground Control
I'm stepping through the door
And I'm floating in a most peculiar way
And the stars look very different today

For here
Am I sitting in a tin can
Far above the world
Planet Earth is blue
And there's nothing I can do

Though I'm past one hundred thousand miles
I'm feeling very still
And I think my spaceship knows which way to go
Tell my wife I love her very much she knows

Ground Control to Major Tom
Your circuit's dead, there's something wrong
Can you hear me, Major Tom?
Can you hear me, Major Tom?
Can you hear me, Major Tom?

Can you "Here am I floating 'round my tin can
Far above the moon
Planet Earth is blue
And there's nothing I can do"

%

The letter
(Kristin Hersh - Hips and makers - 1994)

September 29th, 1984
Dear so and so
Gather me up because I'm lost
Or I'm back where I started from
I'm crawling on the floor
Rolling on the ground
I might cry, I won't go home

So here's the story
I am turning up in circles
And I'm spinning on my knuckles
Don't forget that there are circles left undone
Very close to me
Forgive me. Comfort me

I'm crawling on the floor
Rolling on the ground

There's a blanket wrapped around my head
I'm moving in a line, it's shaped like this
I'm
I'm holding in my breath, I have a room

Can you tell if I am lying?
Don't forget that I'm living inside
The space where walls and floor meet
A box inside my chest
An animal stuffed with my frustration
Can you hear me?

Don't forget that I'm alone when you're away
You make me act like other people do
Forgive me
Comfort me
You comfort me
You make me die
I'm gonna cry
I won't go home

Don't kill the God of Sadness
Just don't let her get you down
See, the man inside a book I read
Can't handle his own head
So what the hell am I supposed to do?
I'd like to know how he died

My hands are shaking
Don't you love me anymore?
I only need a person, keep my shoulders
Stand around, lie down
Move your hand above the floor

Gather me up because I'm lost
Or I'm back where I started from
I'm crawling on the floor
Rolling on the ground
I'm gonna cry
You look for me

Love, Kristin
P.S. Keep them coming

%

Où on va
(Emzel café / Les obsédés du monde - Le monde en bouteille / Ca déglingue - 2012 / 2017)

On n'sait pas où on va avec nos instruments
On se demande un peu à quoi ça sert au mieux.
A gagner notre croûte ou juste faire un voeu,
Un petit peu des deux pour mieux tracer la route.

On n'a besoin de rien pour apprendre à tourner,
Des petits ronds on n'en fait jamais assez.
Et on en fera encore, pour faire de notre vie
Une jolie petite mort.

On n'sait pas où on va, mais faut bien avouer
Qu'on aime les chansons et surtout les chanter.
Qu'elles racontent des histoires ou bien n'importe quoi,
Qu'elles nous donnent envie de boire ou de se rouler dans les draps.

Le même constat s'impose sur un trottoir ou dans les bois
Vraiment on n'tient pas à grand chose quand on se tient à bout de bras.
Et on chantera encore, pour faire de notre vie
Une jolie petite mort.

Quelle vie d'amour on mène, vide d'amour, l'âme en peine,
Mais vide, aimant quand même, d'aimer la vie, évidemment.
Quelle vie d'amour bordel, qu'on en donne ou qu'on en prenne
On n'en aura jamais assez pour remplir nos corps assoiffés.
Avec une question qui tourne en rond
Où c'est qu'on va aller avec notre envie de chanter ?

On n'sait pas où on va mais alors pas du tout,
On sait juste qu'on y va en tenant les deux bouts.
On n'sait pas où on va, mais alors on s'en fout,
On sait juste qu'on y va les jambes pendues à notre cou.

Le même constat s'impose sur un trottoir ou dans les bois
Vraiment on n'tient pas à grand chose quand on se tient à bout de bras.
Et on chantera encore, pour faire de notre vie
Une jolie petite mort.

%

Watch me bleed
(Tears for Fears - The Hurting - 1983)

Heaven comes to he who waits
But I know I'm getting nowhere
And all the deeds of yesterday
Have really helped to pave my way

Though there's no one near me now
How come everyone can touch me
You see the torture on my brow
Relates to neither here nor now

Watch me bleed
Bleed forever
Although my face is straight, it lies
My body feels the pain and cries

Here the table is not bare
I am full but feeling empty
For all the warmth it feels so cold
For one so young I feel so old

Watch me bleed
Bleed forever
It's not allowed to be unkind
But still the hate lives in my mind

I'll make no noise
I'll hide my pain
I'll close my eyes
I won't complain
I'll lie right back and take the blame
And try to tell myself I'm living
And when it's all been said or done
Where do I go ?
Where do I run ?
What's left of me or anyone when we've denied the hurting ?

%

Wish you were here
(Pink Floyd - Wish you were here - 1975)

So, so you think you can tell
Heaven from Hell
Blue sky from pain
Can you tell a green field
From a cold steel rail?
A smile from a veil?
Do you think you can tell?

Did they get you to trade
Your heroes for ghosts?
Hot ashes for trees?
Hot air for a cool breeze?
Cold comfort for change?
And did you exchange
A walk on part in the war
For a lead role in a cage?

How I wish, how I wish you were here
We're just two lost souls
Swimming in a fish bowl
Year after year
Running over the same old ground
What have we found
The same old fears
Wish you were here

%

La folle complainte
(Charles Trénet - 1951)

Les jours de repassage,
Dans la maison qui dort,
La bonne n'est pas sage
Mais on la garde encore.
On l'a trouvée hier soir,
Derrière la porte de bois,
Avec une passoire, se donnant de la joie.
La barbe de grand-père
A tout remis en ordre
Mais la bonne en colère a bien failli le mordre.
Il pleut sur les ardoises,
Il pleut sur la basse-cour,
Il pleut sur les framboises,
Il pleut sur mon amour.

Je me cache sous la table.
Le chat me griffe un peu.
Ce tigre est indomptable
Et joue avec le feu.
Les pantoufles de grand-mère
Sont mortes avant la nuit.
Dormons dans ma chaumière.
Dormez, dormons sans bruit.
Berceau berçant des violes,
Un ange s'est caché
Dans le placard aux fioles
Où l'on me tient couché.
Remède pour le rhume,
Remède pour le coeur,
Remède pour la brume,
Remède pour le malheur.

La revanche des orages
A fait de la maison
Un tendre paysage
Pour les petits garçons
Qui brûlent d'impatience
Deux jours avant Noël
Et, sans aucune méfiance,
Acceptent tout, pêle-mêle :
La vie, la mort, les squares
Et les trains électriques,
Les larmes dans les gares,
Guignol et les coups de triques,
Les becs d'acétylène
Aux enfants assistés
Et le sourire d'Hélène
Par un beau soir d'été.

Donnez-moi quatre planches
Pour me faire un cercueil.
Il est tombé de la branche,
Le gentil écureuil.
Je n'ai pas aimé ma mère.
Je n'ai pas aimé mon sort.
Je n'ai pas aimé la guerre.
Je n'ai pas aimé la mort.
Je n'ai jamais su dire
Pourquoi j'étais distrait.
Je n'ai pas su sourire
A tel ou tel attrait.
J'étais seul sur les routes
Sans dire ni oui ni non.
Mon âme s'est dissoute.
Poussière était mon nom.

%

From one Jesus to another
(The Mission - Masque - 1991)

From one Jesus to another napalm can be a treat
Religion is only cold comfort 'cause Judas Iscariot was a cheat
Bullet holes in my mirror and a minefield across my floor
I don't want to be a soldier, don't want to fight someone else's war
I don't need no Hare Krishna
I don't need no primal scream
I don't need no mantra chant
I don't need no self esteem

I'll take to bed John the Walrus 'cause my Baudelaire has been pawned
Plagued by demons, deceived by angels
What little devils have we spawned?
And Buddha sits on my shelf shooting up Edgar Allan Poe
And I'll dream in "Forbidden colors" just like Vincent van Gogh
I don't need no suit of armor
I don't need no sword and shield
I don't need no immortality
I don't need no Elysian fields
I don't need no lollipops or rainbows
I don't need no hare of the hound
I don't want to be mummy or daddy
I don't need no duty bound

It's bedlam just like Walt Disney and Mickey Mouse causes a scandal
Kahil Gibran was a junkyard and Genghis Khan was a vandal
And I fell in love with Marilyn Monroe and
Then Kennedy told me she'd died
And anyway, if it came to a choice, I'd take Mata Hari for my bride
I don't need no religion or faith
I don't need no collusion
I don't need no spiritual healing
I don't need no self delusion
And Jesus walks on water
But does he ever walk on air?
I'm getting lost again, mummy, scared again, daddy
And the beauty of it all is I no longer care.

%

Wide awake in the concrete asylum
(Antimatter - Fear of a unique identitiy - 2012)

Here in this severance we're calmly incomplete
We've always tried so hard to keep emotion from our sleeves
No small change in a paper cup no hint of deity to promise Eden

Who'll shout our names in marble halls for everyone to hear?
While hollow masses plot the course of grace so insincere
Seems everyday they print the names of those who tried to make a change
Who's next in line to try?

The deaf fall back to making claims to immortality
By congregating, playing games designed to drag your days away
Is there anyone real, is there anyone real who feels right to be here?
In this concrete lie

While the sea is so cold
We leave the toys on the shelf
Try to kiss through the snow
And as the callous grow, the mild remain in here alone
If the cuts should fall from the air would the lines still hang somehow?
Could the walls regain in pride after all has dared to transpire?

Here in this severance were calmly incomplete
While the sea is so cold
We leave the toys on the shelf
Try to kiss through the snow
And as the callous grow
They bow down in droves
To the loudest throne
And we hide as the uniformed clone

%

Under the gun
(The sisters of Mercy - A slight case of overbombing - 1993)

You don't have to say you're sorry
To look on further down the line
Into the sun
Too close at heaven
Love is fine
But you can't hold it like a...

Two worlds apart two together
Into that good night kiss away
One takes the hard, one the other
Kiss away

Are you living for love?
Are you living for love?
When the road gets too tough
Is your love strong enough?
Are you living?
Are you living for love?
Are you living for love?

Do you feel your head is full of thunder?
Questions never end?
Empty nights alone?
No wonder
It all comes back again

Are you living for love?
Are you living for love?
I've been under the gun
I've lost and I've won

(two, three, four)
Forget the many steps to heaven
It never happened and it ain't so hard
Happiness is a loaded weapon and a
Short cut is better by far
Explosive bolts, ten thousand volts
At a million miles an hour
Abrasive wheels and molten metals
It's a semi-automatic, get in the car
Corrosive heart and frozen heat
We're worlds apart where we could meet
Where the street fold round and the motors start
And the idiot wields the power
Where the chosen hold the highest card
On the field of honour where the ground is hard
So the highest hand is joking wild
And the house soon fold and no one stand
I put my finger on and dialed
The tower, the moon, the gun and
Nine nine nine, singer down
Cloudburst and all around
The first are last, the blessed get wired
The best is yet to come
I put my finger on and fired
Heat-seeking, out of the sun
You can set the controls for the heart or the knees
And the meek'll inherit what they damn well please
Get ahead, go figure, go ahead and pull the trigger
Everything under the gun

%

Earthlings
(Haken - Restoration - 2012)

Greed ignites your sin
Black seed burns in a bed of lies
Destroy and annihilate our world
Tearing grace from purity to survive

Helpless life doused in a flash
Plunge in the knife, burning to ashes
They plead, they don't know why they're on show
Hell holds a place for all of us

Watching my friends bleed
I break down, I concede
In life, I knew paradise and freedom
With those now unknown to me I will fly

Helpless life doused in a flash
Plunge in the knife, burning to ashes
They plead, they don't know why they're on show
Mercy betrayed, floods cannot wash away

All of the pain rushes in
Beauty deceased, instinct takes over
Bygone are the days, darkness reigns
Hell holds a place for all of us

Life, endless paradise
Beauty painted by sin
Hell on Earth breeding ignorance
The door opens for us

Greed ignites pain inflames the weak but we remain bygone
Marching on, they watch as their kind suffer and die before them
Is this not some kind of genocide? Breaking, crushing, defiling
We live as Lords of the Earth, we bear powers of mercy yet we choose

Life, endless paradise
Beauty broken by sin
Hell on Earth breeding ignorance
The door opens for us

Life, endless paradise
Beauty destroyed by sin
Hell on Earth breeding ignorance
Hell holds a place for us

Open the door
Open the door

%

Le diable (Ça va)
(Jacque Brel - 1955)

Un jour, un jour le diable vint sur Terre
Un jour le diable vint sur Terre
Pour surveiller ses intérêts
Il a tout vu le diable
Il a tout entendu
Et après avoir tout vu
Et après avoir tout entendu
Il est retourné chez lui, là-bas
Et là-bas, on avait fait un grand banquet
À la fin du banquet, il s'est levé le diable
Il a prononcé un discours...

Ça va,
Il y a toujours un peu partout
Des feux illuminant la Terre
Ça va,
Les Hommes s'amusent comme des fous
Au dangereux jeu de la guerre
Des trains déraillent avec fracas
Parce que des gars pleins d'idéal
Mettent des bombes sur les voies
Ça fait des morts originales
Ça fait des morts sans confession
Des confessions sans rémission

Rien ne se vend mais tout s'achète
L'honneur et même la sainteté
Ça va,
les États se muent en cachette
En anonymes sociétés
Ça va,
les grands s'arrachent les dollars
Venus du pays des enfants
L'Europe répète l'Avare
Dans un décor de 1900
Ça fait des morts d'inanition
Et l'inanition des nations

Ça va, les Hommes, ils en ont tant vu
Que leurs yeux sont devenus gris
Ça va, et l'on ne chante même plus
Dans toutes les rues de Paris
Ça va, on traite les braves de fous
Et les poètes de nigauds
Mais dans les journaux de partout
Tous les salauds ont leur photo
Ça fait mal aux honnêtes gens
Et rire les malhonnêtes gens

Ça va, ça va, ça va, ça va

%

Le soleil est noir
(Tri Yann - Urba - 1978)

Bel oiseau blanc du bout du monde
Fils de deux muets, fils du pays
Rebelle semblant entre deux mondes
Tir d'aile sanglant de quel pays ?
Feu noir sur trois abers
Sang noir sur dix estuaires
Sept îles et fer en pluie

Battu de vent, flottant bastion
Battu devant, flots, tourbillons
Battu, battant sang pavillon
Soleil levant, noir sans rayons
Noirs l'eau, le feu, la terre
Noirs de feu les deux airs
Le vent, la brume aussi

Mer est en brume, soleil déforme
Terre est en brume, vieille difforme
Doigts sont changeant en dix corneilles
Poissons sanglants en dix orteils
Pigeons de feu sur mer
Poison de gueux sous mer
Sept îles et fer en pluie

Morte saison sans floraison
Morte maison, sang, déraison
Saisons perdues en oraisons
Moissons perdues sans rébellion
Feuillaison en hiver
Fenaison en désert
Grésil de fer en pluie

Discours de feu, discours de veau
Concours de peu, discours dévots
Secours de peu, futiles travaux
Séjour de feu pour mille chevaux
Noire langue des vipères
Noire lande de colère
Les vents, les hommes aussi

Mil malloz ru, chant de l'épée
Mille noires statues, noirs policiers
Mille poings tendus, dix poings brisés
Mille printemps dus pour mille années
Cent mille hommes en colère
Mille hommes sans la mer
Sang, larmes et fer en pluie

Mortes tribus sans héritiers
Portent tribut, sang à payer
Soleil fendu, bois condamnés
Sol est vendu, lois sont damnées
Au temps que meurt la mer
Autant se meurt la terre
Sous peur, sous fer en pluie

Jour de demain, courage ardent
Jour de Samain, coups, rage aux dents
Seront les veaux perdant sang blanc
Seront les loups perdant cent dents
Rouge fin, rouge avers
Rouges poings, rouge guerre
Rouges mains, rouges serres
Rouge festin, rouge chair
Rouge vin, rouge bière
Le feu, la mer aussi

%

Comfortably numb
(Pink Floyd - The wall - 1979)

Hello,
Is there anybody in there?
Just nod if you can hear me.
Is there anybody home?

Come on now, I hear you're feelin' down
Well, I can ease your pain
and get you on your feet again.

Relax. I need some information first.
Relax. Just to face the facts.
Can you show me where it hurts?

There is no pain you are receeding.
A distant ship floats on the horizon.
You're only comin' through in waves.
Your lips move, but I can't hear what you're saying.
When I was a child I caught a fever.
My hands felt like two balloons.
Now I've got that feeling once again,
I can't explain; you would not understand.
This is now who I am.
I've become comfortably numb.

OK. It's just a little pinprick.
There'll be no more high, but you may feel a little sick.

Can you stand up now?
I do believe it's working.
Gotta keep it goin' through the show;
come on, it's time to go.

There is no pain you are receeding.
A distant ship floats on the horizon.
You're only comin' through in waves.
Your lips move, but I can't hear what you're saying.
When I was a child I caught a fleeting glimpse
Out of the corner of my eye.
I turned to look but it was gone.
I could not put my finger on it.
The child is grown; the dream is gone.

I've become comfortably numb.

%

Il nous ment
(Fabulous trobadors - Duel de tchatche et autres trucs du folklore toulousain - 2003)

Il nous ment, il nous ment
C'est du vent il nous balade
Il nous vend que des salades
Y en a marre des boniments

Il nous ment, il nous ment
C'est du vent il nous balade
Il nous vend que des salades
Y en a marre des boniments

Regardez son nez s'allonge, il nous ment effrontément!
S'il a l'air aussi sincère, c'est parce qu'il ment franchement!
C'est rien que du blablabla, il a pas un seul argument!
C'est à des fins bien précises qu'il nous parle vaguement!
On fera pas de concessions, y aura pas d'arrangements!
Il nous promet des embauches, il y aura des licenciements!
Pas question qu'on lui laisse faire ça impunément!
Et méfions-nous des reculades quand il parle avancement!
Ce qu'il veut, c'est nous casser purement et simplement!
On va lui répondre merde, poliment mais fermement!
Y'a trop de belles paroles, on veut de vrais changements!
Pas de plans sur la comète, un plan de recrutement!
Ce qu'on veut, ce qu'on exige, c'est de vrais engagements!
Il nous parle d'arbitrage, mais vous avez vu comment!
Qui c'est qui choisit l'arbitre, c'est lui arbitrairement!
Plus il parle, plus il ment, il se croit au parlement!

Écoutez ses jérémiades, il en fait tout un roman!
Mon coeur se serre à ses sermons et à tous ses serments!
Il nous raconte sa vie, il veut nous prendre aux sentiments!
On s'en fout de son histoire, qu'il la raconte à sa maman!
S'il croit qu'on va le croire et gober ça aveuglément!
Il se met le doigt dans l'oeil, qu'il se le mette au fondement!
En un an on gagne moins que ses frais de déplacement!
S'il me donne son salaire, je veux bien ses embêtements!
Qu'il ajoute son capital, et je prends tous ses tourments!
On les connaît ses excuses et tous ses empêchements!
Avec son flot de promesses, il soûlerait un régiment!
Ça fait des mois qu'on réclame, et il feint l'étonnement!
Il nous paye une misère et il veut des remerciements!
Ce qu'il voudrait peut-être c'est qu'on bosse bénévolement!
Les heures supplémentaires, ça se paie en supplément!
Qu'il nous parle un peu de pèze, on verra pour l'apaisement!

Oh vraiment il est gonflé, parler d'épanouissement!
Dévouement à l'entreprise, oui mais pas n'importe comment!
Attachement à la boîte, oui mais pas enchaînement!
On est OK pour le service, pas pour l'asservissement!
Nous, on veut bien que ça change, mais c'est quoi ses changements ?
Pour lui les améliorations, pour nous les désagréments!
Devinez ce qui se cache sous le mot redéploiement ?
Devinez ce qui se cache sous le mot remaniement ?
On va lui faire piger que nous, on voit les choses autrement!
Il veut nous assassiner avec notre assentiment!
Les coups en douce, les magouilles, il est dans son élément!
Au plus grand menteur sur terre, on va lui faire un monument!
Un monument qu'on payera avec ses émoluments!
Mais vraiment il nous les brise, pour parler vulgairement!
Maintenant moi j'en ai marre, faut qu'il nous traite autrement!
Maintenant y en a assez, virons-le sans ménagement!

Non non non, faut rester calme, pas de signe d'énervements
C'est justement ce qu'il cherche, qu'on craque nerveusement!
Pas de geste individuel, faut agir collectivement!
Jusqu'ici, tout s'est décidé très démocratiquement
Ce qu'il faut, c'est tenir bon, tous ensemble dignement
On est là, et on y reste jusqu'à leur épuisement
Tiens voilà les petits chefs et tout l'encadrement
Costard noir et mine sombre, on dirait un enterrement!
Regardez l'autre chochotte avec ses chuchotements!
C'est son larbin machin truc, on veut pas de son truchement
C'est pour nous faire maigrir qu'il est payé grassement!
Il va venir nous prêcher la paix et le renoncement!
Hé bé, on va l'envoyer paître mais très pacifiquement!
Il peut plus pigeonner les jeunes avec ses roucoulements!
Les voilà qui s'approchent avec des toussotements!
Qu'ils se préparent leurs phrases, va y avoir de l'engouement!

Prenons l'air de mine de rien, on va voir leur comportement!
Cette histoire de chorale dépasse leur entendement!
À voir comment ils pointent le nez, on voit leur désappointement!
Continuons à chanter en conversant tranquillement!
Tiens j'ai trouvé un sujet, je vais vous parler d'instrument!
Le tambourin, pour les manifs, c'est le top assurément!
Ça accompagne la parole, sans la couvrir bruyamment
C'est pas lourd, c'est mobile, et ça se joue facilement!
Oui messieurs, on peut répondre, mais chansonnièrement!
Non messieurs, on reste là, pas d'autre fonctionnement!
Totalement hors de question de nous prendre séparément!
On marche pas dans ces trucs, c'est que des raisonnements!
On veut parler de tout ici, devant tous, transparement!
Tout à fait, c'est très possible, et pas démagogiquement!
Ce qu'on veut, ce qu'on attend, c'est des éclaircissements!
Oui d'accord, si vous voulez, appelez ça entêtement!

Moi, je veux m'adresser à vous et très personnellement!
À vous qui parlez toujours de ce fameux management!
Est-ce que vous avez pensé à votre déménagement ?
Lui, il se fout de notre ville comme du département!
Et même du pays, il s'en fiche éperdument!
La région, il a rien fait pour son développement!
Une entreprise, aujourd'hui, qu'importe son emplacement!
Il peut aller la mettre ailleurs tout à fait légalement!
En jouant comme il voudra la carte des dérèglements!
Il peut aussi parmi vous opérer des dégraissements!
Ce qui compte avant tout pour lui, c'est son enrichissement!
Le profit n'a pas d'attache, ni famille, ni logement!
Il n'a rien fait pour transformer ce qu'on vit localement!
Il n'a jamais montré aucun désintéressement!
Aujourd'hui, c'est nous qui avons tous les emmerdements!
Mais après nous, ce sera vous qui vivrez tous ces mauvais moments!

Voilà maintenant les gros bras, c'est pas pour des embrassements!
Comme dirait La Palice, on va vers un durcissement!
Il veut l'épreuve de force, ça va se corser forcément!
Vous voyez messieurs les cadres, à vous aussi il vous ment!
Il vous envoie des dossiers en préparant l'affrontement!
Et comptez pas trop sur vous pour un heureux dénouement!
Il veut mener ça rondement, alors il y va carrément!
Des vigiles avec des chiens qui aboient discrètement!
On voit bien ce qu'il prépare, ça s'appelle encerclement!
Et puis juste après, viendra la phase du harcèlement!
Tiens les voilà qu'ils se moquent, sourions leur gentiment!
On répond pas, on provoque, accueillons les poliment!
Continuons à chanter malgré leurs ricanements!
C'est là que nous les battrons, psycho-logiquement!
Ah y'a tous ces gens qu'arrivent en soutien civiquement!
Putain j'ai la gorge sèche, passe-moi de l'aliment!

Oh la la, ça s'agite, c'est plus un pressentiment!
Tous les cadres ont disparu, comme par enchantement!
Ah voilà les CRS, ça va mettre du piment!
Ils passent pas par hasard pour nous faire des compliments!
Et y'a même pas une heure, il nous parlait de règlement!
Il disait on va s'entendre, vous voyez bien qu'il nous ment!
Y'a les pompiers, les ambulances, et tout le tremblement!
On voit qu'il prévoit le pire, il croit plus au pourrissement!
Il sait pas qu'il manipule une bombe à retardement!
On est là et on y reste, surtout pas d'affolement!
Je vous jure, cette affaire aura du retentissement!
Le conflit social du siècle à l'écran prochainement!
Tout le monde est alerté, et même le gouvernement!
Ça débraye de partout, et y a l'effet d'entraînement!
Partout des gens se lèvent, ça sent le soulèvement!
C'est la grève générale qui suit généralement!

Il change un peu d'attitude, y a un peu de flottement!
Ils sont déstabilisés devant ce rassemblement!
La foule nous multiplie les signes d'encouragement!
Ils reprennent nos réponses, ça marche impeccablement!
On se croirait à l'opéra avec ces applaudissements!
Toutes les télés sont là, venues expressément!
Même la presse nationale arrive avec empressement!
Pour eux cette manif chantée, c'est de l'or manifestement!
Et le fait qu'on improvise au fil des événements!
Au rythme de la musique et des faits également!
D'autant que ce que nous chantons influe sur le déroulement!
Fais passer les photocop' de la liste des mots en -ment!
Il faut se creuser la tête pour les caser habilement!
Et pas placer deux fois le même, y aurai plus d'amusement!
Si y en a plus, on en créera néo-logiquement!
Et on pourra improviser jusqu'à perpétuellement!

Regardez les, regardez-les, ils renoncent apparemment!
Ah oui, ça bien ça, putain quel renversement!
Et bien ça y est, on a gagné, c'est un complet revirement!
J'ai jamais vu de conflit réglé si rapidement!
C'est fini, j'en reviens pas, j'en reviens pas, franchement!
Sans gueulade, sans violence, réglé musicalement!
Ça fait quand même huit jours qu'on tient le battement!
Maintenant il va nous parler un peu plus honnêtement!
Il va nous mentir encore, mais moins mensongèrement!
Moi je veux bien qu'il nous mente s'il augmente friquement
Jusqu'ici ce qu'il augmentait, c'était que le rendement!
C'est un vrai scénario qu'on a écrit chanteusement!
J'ai pas envie d'arrêter de chanter ce il nous ment!
C'est devenu un réflexe respiratoirement
Personne veut partir, jouons les prolongements!
Ce refrain, il va l'entendre dans sa tête éternellement!

%

Déserteur
(Renaud - Morgane de toi - 1983)

Monsieur le président je vous fais une bafouille
Que vous lirez sûrement si vous avez des couilles
Je viens de recevoir un coup de fil de mes vieux
Pour me prévenir que les gendarmes s'étaient pointés chez eux
J'ose pas imaginer ce que leur a dit mon père
Lui les flics les curés et pis les militaires
Il les a vraiment dans le nez p't'être encore plus que moi
Dès qu'il peut en bouffer
l'vieil anar il se gêne pas

Alors il paraît qu'on me cherche
Que la France a besoin de moi
C'est con j'suis en Ardèche
Il fait beau tu le crois pas
J'suis là avec des potes des écolos marrants
On a une vieille bicoque on la retape tranquillement
On fait pousser des chèvres on fabrique des bijoux
On peut pas dire qu'on se crève
Le travail c'est pas pour nous
On a des plantations pas énormes : 3 hectares
D'une herbe qui rend moins con
Non c'est pas du ricard

Monsieur le président je suis un déserteur
De ton armée de glands de ton troupeau de branleurs
Ils auront pas ma peau ils toucheront pas à mes cheveux
J'saluerai pas le drapeau j'marcherai pas comme les boeufs
J'irai pas en Allemagne faire le con pendant douze mois
Dans une caserne infâme avec des plus cons que moi
J'aime pas recevoir des ordres, j'aime pas me lever tôt
J'aime pas étrangler le borgne
Plus souvent qu'il ne faut

Pis surtout ce qui me déplaît c'est que j'aime pas la guerre
Et qui c'est qui la fait? ben c'est les militaires
Il sont nuls, il sont moches et pis il sont teigneux
Maintenant j'vais te dire pourquoi j'veux jamais être comme eux
Quand les Russes les Ricains feront péter la planète
Moi j'aurai l'air malin avec ma bicyclette
Mon pantalon trop court mon fusil mon calot
Ma ration de topinambours
Et ma ligne Maginot

Alors me gonfle pas, ni moi ni tous mes potes
Je s'rai jamais soldat j'aime pas les bruits de bottes
T'as plus qu'à pas t'en faire et construire tranquillos
Tes centrales nucléaires, tes sous-marins craignos
Et va pas t'imaginer M. le président
Que j'suis manipulé par les rouges ou les blancs
Je ne suis qu'un militant du parti des oiseaux,
Des baleines, des enfants,
De la terre et de l'eau

M. le président pour finir ma bafouille
j'voulais te dire simplement que ce soir on s'fait des nouilles
À la ferme c'est l'panard si tu veux viens bouffer
On fumera un pétard et on pourra causer

%

La complainte de la butte
(Jean Renoir / Georges van Parys - 1955)

En haut de la rue St-Vincent
Un poète et une inconnue
S'aimèrent l'espace d'un instant
Mais il ne l'a jamais revue

Cette chanson il composa
Espérant que son inconnue
Un matin d'printemps l'entendra
Quelque part au coin d'une rue

La lune trop blême
Pose un diadème
Sur tes cheveux roux
La lune trop rousse
De gloire éclabousse
Ton jupon plein d'trous

La lune trop pâle
Caresse l'opale
De tes yeux blasés
Princesse de la rue
Soit la bienvenue
Dans mon coeur blessé

Les escaliers de la butte sont durs aux miséreux
Les ailes des moulins protègent les amoureux

Petite mendigote
Je sens ta menotte
Qui cherche ma main
Je sens ta poitrine
Et ta taille fine
J'oublie mon chagrin

Je sens sur tes lèvres
Une odeur de fièvre
De gosse mal nourrie
Et sous ta caresse
Je sens une ivresse
Qui m'anéantit

Les escaliers de la butte sont durs aux miséreux
Les ailes des moulins protègent les amoureux

Mais voilà  qu'il flotte
La lune se trotte
La princesse aussi
Sous le ciel sans lune
Je pleure à  la brune
Mon rêve évanoui

%

Comparaison (n'est pas raison)
(Sarclo - SarcloSolo - 1991)

T'es belle comme un chocolat
Comme un koala
Comme un courant d'air
Belle comme un camion de briques
Comme un train électrique
Dans la vitrine de chez Weber

T'es belle comme un jour de grève
Belle comme le Salève
Depuis Collonges
Belle comme un panier de prunes
Belle comme un coup de lune
Comme les jours qui s'allongent

T'es belle comme un radiateur
Belle comme un chou-fleur
Belle comme un crayon
T'es belle comme du blé qui pousse
Comme le Petit Larousse
À la page des avions

T'es belle comme un toit d'ardoise
Un bonbon framboise
Qui colle dans les poches
Belle comme un arrosoir
Comme une pile de mouchoirs
Comme un manche de pioche

T'es belle comme la tour Eiffel
Belle comme une poubelle
Comme un champ de colza
T'es belle comme des vieilles chaussures
Une vieille chanson de Couture
Et cætera

T'es belle comme la tour Eiffel
Belle comme une poubelle
Comme un champ de colza
T'es belle comme un dessin d' Poussin
Une chanson de Desjardins
Et cætera

%

La ballade de Johnny Jane
(Serge Gainsbourg - Je t'aime moi non plus - 1977)

Hey Johnny Jane
Te souviens-tu du film de Gainsbourg Je t'aime
Je t'aime moi non plus un joli thème

Hey Johnny Jane
Toi qui traînes tes baskets et tes yeux candides
Dans les no man's land et les lieux sordides

Hey Johnny Jane
Les décharges publiques sont des atlantides
Que survolent les mouches cantharides

Hey Johnny Jane
Tous les camions à benne
Viennent y déverser bien des peines infanticides

Hey Johnny Jane
Tu balades tes cheveux courts ton teint livide
À la recherche de ton amour suicide

Hey Johnny Jane
Du souvenir veux-tu trancher la carotide
À coups de pieds dans les conserves vides

Oh Johnny Jane
Un autre camion à benne
Te transportera de bonheur en bonheur sous les cieux limpides

Hey Johnny Jane
Ne fais pas l'enfant ne sois pas si stupide
Regarde les choses en face sois lucide

Hey Johnny Jane
Efface tout ça, recommence, liquide
De ta mémoire ces brefs instants torrides

Hey Johnny Jane
Un autre camion à benne
Viendra te prendre pour t'emmener vers d'autres Florides

Hey Johnny Jane
Toi qui traînes tes baskets et tes yeux candides
Dans les no man's land et les lieux sordides

Hey Johnny Jane
Écrase d'un poing rageur ton oeil humide
Le temps ronge l'amour comme l'acide

%

Better days
(Supertramp - Brother where you bound - 1985)

Trust me, I can help you
Feel free, we can save you
Join us in the good life
And better days, better days

Campaign for a new life
Champagne and the bright lights
Make way for the right way
And better days, better days

You didn't realize about the other life that we can give you
We'll open up your eyes and make you see the light that's all around you
We'll help you work it out and then you'll never doubt
Our intuition, our vision, our decision, our mission, so listen

No war, no inflation
No more desperation
You'll see we can show you
Better days, better days

No hunger, higher wages
Good schools, smiling faces
Make way for the new way
Better days, better days

We're going to lead you down to where the sun is always brightly shining
We'll push away the clouds and show you there's a gold and silver lining
We'll take away the pain, you'll want to try again
You won't be sorry, so don't worry, don't worry, so hurry and join me

%

Rame
(Alain Souchon - Rame - 1980)

Pagaie, pas gai,
Sur cette vieille Loire.
Pagaie, pas gai:
T'arriveras nulle part,

Héron, héron
Là-haut, guetteur,
Vois-tu, vois-tu ailleurs ?

Bout d'bois, bout d'bois,
Beau caoutchouc,
Flotte-moi, flotte-moi,
Plus loin qu'chez nous.

Baignoire, baignoire,
Tu m'as menti.
Ailleurs, ailleurs
c'est comme ici.

Rame, rame. Rameurs, ramez.
On avance à rien dans c'canoë.
Là-haut,
On t'mène en bateau :
Tu n'pourras jamais tout quitter, t'en aller...
Tais-toi et rame.

J'm'en vais, j'm'en vais,
Mais l'eau est lasse.
Chaumont, Langeais,
A peine Amboise.

Amour, cordon,
ficelle serrée,
Lâchez, lâchez : 
j'veux m'en aller.

Rame, rame. Rameurs, ramez.
On avance à rien dans c'canoë.
Là-haut,
On t'mène en bateau :
Tu n'pourras jamais tout quitter, t'en aller...
Tais-toi et rame.

%
So long, and thanks for all the fish
(A perfect circle - Eat the elephant - 2018)

Time is money and money is time
We wasted every second dime
On diets, lawyers, shrinks and apps
And flags, and plastic surgery
Now Willy Wonka, Major Tom
Ali and Leia have moved on
Signal the final curtain call
In all this atomic pageantry

Bravissimo, hip-hip hooray
For this fireworks display
Mind and body blown away
What a radiant crescendo

Ticker tape parade
Our hair and skin like
Like Marilyn Monroe
In an empty wind

Time is money and money is time
We wasted every second dime
On politicians, fancy water
And guns, and plastic surgery
Like old Prince and Brady's mom
All the dolphins have moved on
Signaling the final curtain call
In all this atomic pageantry

Bravissimo, hip-hip hooray
What a glorious display
Melt our joyous hearts away
Under the mushroom cloud confetti

Hip-hip hooray
For this fireworks display
Mind and body blown away
What a radiant crescendo

Hip-hip hooray
Hip-hip hooray

Ticker tape parade
Our hair and skin like
Like Marilyn Monroe
In an empty wind

Time is money and money is time
We wasted every second dime
On diets, lawyers, shrinks and apps
And flags, and plastic surgery
Now Willy Wonka, Major Tom
Ali and Leia have moved on
Signal the final curtain call
In all this atomic pageantry

%

Rest'la Maloya
(Alain Peters)

Pier, Paul, Jak ek Jozeph
Carro, pik, kèr, sanm trèf
Té parti fé kampagn
Pou sé pa kel charlemagne

Garoté dan in bel pagne
Grymp la ho la montagn
Kom sel résolityon
Fann zot dépitatyon

Zot té biny' dan linkompréantyon
Ke lété vrémen total
Nou té ki di "sa ban la pa normal"

Vautré si la plaze la Rényon
Ou byin dan sité béton
Kantité la moral zot té i aval

Malgré zot figir landmin kou de van
Té vé war kosa navé pli d'van

Rest la maloya, rest la minm

Mon ti momon gaté
Doulèr la di pasé
Pou awar fé a mwin
Oui ton garson Alain

Néna osi mon fille
Le tit' Ananda Davy
La konu son papa
Su l'mars le plis en ba

Pa tou pa tou lé zour
Mwin lété pou twé in bon soutyin
Mi arkoné ke mwin la fé plis de mal ke de byin

Marco bompé noré pa fé
Set twé la fé pou mwin
Kan twé la ramas a mwin dan somin

Fo pa kol kouplé ek le rofrin
San tro rode ki koté sa i vyin

Rest la maloya, rest la minm

Mi di té pa fasil
Ban pensé pa dosil
Fo lav bordaz pesé
Ryin ke pou kominié

Pran pa ou pou gorile
Ou vé artrouv out lil
Pa tro martirisé
Ek tout' ladilafé

Osi zordi mi vé byin say'
Rale in kou si le rofrin
Pa si tan borde le rhum ek tout' le vin

Bon Dyé aster na ryin k'ou
Pou tir a mwin dan ce mové trin
Mi préfér larg mon l'ame dan out la min

Mi koné pou mwin sra difisil
Mé mi voudré pi artourn lazil

Rest la maloya, rest la minm

%

The wind that shakes the barley
(Robert Dwyer Joyce - 1861)

I sat within the valley green, I sat me with my true love
My sad heart strove the two between, the old love and the new love
The old for her, the new that made me think on Ireland dearly
While soft the wind blew down the glen and shook the golden barley

'Twas hard the woeful words to frame to break the ties that bound us
But harder still to bear the shame of foreign chains around us
And so I said, "The mountain glen I'll seek at morning early
And join the bold united men," while soft winds shake the barley

While sad I kissed away her tears, my fond arms round her flicking
When the foeman's shot burst on our ears from out the wildwood ringing
A bullet pierced my true love's side in life's young spring so early
And on my breast in blood she died while soft winds shook the barley

I bore her to some mountain stream, and many's the summer blossom
I placed with branches soft and green about her gore-stained bosom
I wept and kissed her clay-cold corpse then rushed o'er vale and valley
My vengeance on the foe to wreak while soft wind shook the barley

But blood for blood without remorse I've taken at Oulart Hollow
And laid my true love's clay cold corpse where I full soon may follow
As round her grave I wander drear, noon, night and morning early
With breaking heart when e'er I hear the wind that shakes the barley.

%

Word crimes
(Weird Al Yankovic - Mandatory Fun - 2014)

Everybody shut up
Everyone listen up!

If you can't write in the proper way
If you don't know how to conjugate
Maybe you flunked that class
And maybe now you find
That people mock you on-line
(Everybody wise up!)

Okay, now here's the deal
I'll try to educate ya
Gonna familiarize
You with the nomenclature
You'll learn the definitions
Of nouns and prepositions
Literacy's your mission

And that's why I think it's a good time
To learn some grammar (What!?)
Now, did I stammer?
Work on that grammar
You should know when
It's "less" or it's "fewer"
Like people who were
Never raised in a sewer

I hate these word crimes
Like "I could care less"
That means you do care
At least a little
Don't be a moron
You'd better slow down
And use the right pronoun
Show the world you're no clown
Everybody wise up!

Say you got an "it"
Followed by apostrophe, "s"
Now what does that mean?
You would not use "it's" in this case
As a possessive (no no no)
It's a contraction (yeah yeah yeah)
What's a contraction?
Well, it's a shortening of a word, or a group of words by omission of a sound or letter

Okay, now here's some notes
Syntax you're always mangling
No "x" in "espresso"
Your participle's danglin'
But I don't want your drama
If you really wanna
Leave out that Oxford comma

Just keep in mind that "be", "see", "are", "you"
Are words, not letters
Get it together
Use your spell-checker
You should never
Write words using numbers
Unless you're seven
Or your name is Prince
Everybody wise up!

I hate these word crimes (I hate them crimes)
You really need a (I hate them crimes)
Full-time proofreader (I mean those crimes)
You dumb mouth-breather
Well, you should hire
Some cunning linguist
To help you distinguish
What is proper English
Everybody wise up!

One thing I ask of you
Time to learn your homophones is past due
Learn to diagram a sentence too
Always say "to whom"
Don't ever say "to who"
And listen up when I tell you this
I hope you never use quotation marks for emphasis
You finished second grade
I hope you can tell
If you're doing good or doing well
Everybody wise up!
You'd better figure out the difference
Irony is not coincidence
And I thought that you'd gotten it through your skull
What's figurative and what's literal
Oh but just now you said
You literally couldn't get out of bed (What!?)
That really makes me want to literally
Smack a crowbar upside your stupid head
Everybody wise up!

I read your e-mail
It's quite apparent
Your grammar's errant
You're incoherent
Saw your blog post
It's really fantastic
That was sarcastic (Oh, psych!)
'Cause you write like a spastic

I hate these word crimes
Everybody wise up!
Your prose is dopey
Think you should only
Write in emoji
Oh, you're a lost 'cause
Go back to pre-school
Get out of the gene pool
Try your best to not drool

Never mind I give up
Really now I give up
Go away! 

%

Foil
(Weird Al Yankovic - Mandatory fun - 2014)

I never seem to finish all my food
I always get a doggie bag from the waiter
So I just keep what's still unchewed
And I take it home, save it for later

But then I deal with fungal rot, bacterial formation
Microbes, enzymes, mold and oxidation
I don't care, I've got a secret trick up my sleeve
I never bother with baggies, glass jars, Tupperware containers
Plastic cling wrap, really a no-brainer
I just like to keep all my flavours sealed in tight

With aluminum foil
Never settle for less
That kind of wrap is just the best
To keep your sandwich nice and fresh
Stick it in your cooler
Eat it when you're ready
Then maybe you'll choose
A refreshing herbal tea

Mmm, lovely!

Oh, by the way, I've cracked the code
I've figured out these shadow organizations
And the Illuminati know
That they're finally primed for world domination

And soon you've got black helicopters coming 'cross the border
Puppet masters for the New World Order
Be aware: there's always someone that's watching you
And still the government won't admit they faked the whole moon landing
Thought control rays, psychotronic scanning
Don't mind that, I'm protected 'cause I made this hat

From aluminum foil
Wear a hat that's foil lined
In case an alien's inclined
To probe your butt or read your mind
Looks a bit peculiar
Seems a little crazy
But someday I'll prove
There's a big conspiracy

%

Hallelujah
(Leonard Cohen - Various positions - 1984)

Now I've heard there was a secret chord
That David played, and it pleased the Lord
But you don't really care for music, do you?
It goes like this, the fourth, the fifth
The minor fall, the major lift
The baffled king composing Hallelujah

Hallelujah, Hallelujah
Hallelujah, Hallelujah

Your faith was strong but you needed proof
You saw her bathing on the roof
Her beauty and the moonlight overthrew you
She tied you to a kitchen chair
She broke your throne, and she cut your hair
And from your lips she drew the Hallelujah

Hallelujah, Hallelujah
Hallelujah, Hallelujah

You say I took the name in vain
I don't even know the name
But if I did—well, really—what's it to you?
There's a blaze of light in every word
It doesn't matter which you heard
The holy or the broken Hallelujah

Hallelujah, Hallelujah
Hallelujah, Hallelujah

I did my best, it wasn't much
I couldn't feel, so I tried to touch
I've told the truth, I didn't come to fool you
And even though it all went wrong
I'll stand before the Lord of Song
With nothing on my tongue but Hallelujah

%

Goodnight moon
(Shivaree - I oughtta give you a shot in the head for making me live in this dump - 1999)

There's a nail in the door
And there's glass on the lawn
Tacks on the floor
And the TV is on
And I always sleep with my guns
When you're gone

There's a blade by the bed
And a phone in my hand
A dog on the floor
And some cash on the nightstand
When I'm all alone the dreaming stops
And I just can't stand

What should I do I'm just a little baby
What if the lights go out and maybe
And then the wind just starts to moan
Outside the door he followed me home
Well goodnight moon I want the sun
If it's not here soon I might be done
No it won't be too soon 'til I say
Goodnight moon

There's a shark in the pool
And a witch in the tree
A crazy old neighbour
and he's been watching me
And there's footsteps loud and strong
coming down the hall

Something's under the bed
Now it's out in the hedge
There's a big black crow
sitting on my window ledge
And I hear something scratching
through the wall

Oh what should I do I'm just a little baby
What if the lights go out and maybe
I just hate to be all alone
Outside the door he followed me home
Now goodnight moon I want the sun
If it's not here soon I might be done
No it won't be too soon 'til I say
Goodnight moon

Well you're up so high
How can you save me
When the dark comes here
Tonight to take me up
To my front walk and into bed
Where it kisses my face and eats my head

Oh what should I do I'm just a little baby
What if the lights go out and maybe
I just hate to be all alone
Outside the door he followed me home
Now goodnight moon I want the sun
If it's not here soon I might be done
No it won't be too soon 'til I say
Goodnight moon

%

Champagne
(Jacques higelin - Champagne pour tout le monde - 1979)

La nuit promet d'être belle
Car voici qu'au fond du ciel
Apparaît la lune rousse
Saisi d'une sainte frousse
Tout le commun des mortels
Croit voir le diable à ses trousses

Valets volages et vulgaires
Ouvrez mon sarcophage
Et vous pages pervers
Courrez au cimetière
Prévenez de ma part
Mes amis nécrophages
Que ce soir nous sommes attendus dans les marécages

Voici mon message
Cauchemars, fantômes et squelettes
Laissez flotter vos idées noires
Près de la mare aux oubliettes
Tenue du suaire obligatoire

Lutins, lucioles, feux-follets,
Elfes, faunes et farfadets
S'effraient d'mes grands carnassiers
Une muse un peu dodue
Me dit d'un air entendu
Vous auriez pu vous raser
Comme je lui fais remarquer
Deux, trois pendus attablés
Qui sont venus sans cravate
Elle me lance un oeil hagard
Et vomit sans crier gare
Quelques vipères écarlates

Vampires éblouis
Par de lubriques vestales
Égéries insatiables
Chevauchant des Walkyries
Infernals appétits de frénésies bacchanales
Qui charment nos âmes envahies par la mélancolie

Envoi
Satyres joufflus, boucs émissaires
Gargouilles émues, fières gorgones
Laissez ma couronne aux sorcières
Et mes chimères à la licorne

Soudain les arbres frissonnent
Car Lucifer en personne
Fait une courte apparition
L'air tellement accablé
Qu'on lui donnerait volontiers
Le bon Dieu sans confession
S'il ne laissait malicieux
Courir le bout de sa queue
Devant ses yeux maléfiques
Et ne se dressait d'un bond
Dans un concert de jurons
Disant d'un ton pathétique

Que les damnés obscènes cyniques et corrompus
Fassent griefs de leur peine à ceux qu'ils ont élus
Car devant tant de problèmes
Et de malentendus
Les dieux et les diables en sont venus à douter d'eux-mêmes
Oh dédain suprême

Mais déjà le ciel blanchit
Esprits je vous remercie
De m'avoir si bien reçu
Cocher lugubre et bossu, déposez-moi au manoir
Et lâchez ce crucifix
Décrochez-moi ces gousses d'ail
Qui déshonorent mon portail
Et me cherchez sans retard
L'ami qui soigne et guérit
La folie qui m'accompagne
Et jamais ne m'a trahi

Champagne !

%

Dewey and the bible teacher
(Malcolm - Season 4, episode 22 - Day Care)

DEWEY: Like Pastor Roy said, how God is so much bigger and wiser than us, and trying to see what He's thinking would be like an ant trying to see what I'm thinking.

HELEN: Yes, exactly. But we can trust in His wisdom, and have faith that He is watching over us.

DEWEY: Like me with the anthill in my backyard. I spent days watching the ants, trying to figure out which ones were good, and which ones were bad, but they all just looked like ants, so I started smiting all of them.

HELEN: Well that's not -

DEWEY: I was smiting them with the garden hose, and with lighter fluid, and with the lawnmower, and to be perfectly honest, I think I went a little crazy with the shovel. Those ants could have been praying to me all day, I wouldn't have heard them. [ponders] There was nothing they could do about it.

HELEN: But, I don't think -

DEWEY: Really, it's the same with us. There's nothing we can do about anything either, so why worry about it? Hey, this is making me feel better.

HELEN: Well, that's good, but -

DEWEY : I guess all we can do is live our lives with as much kindness and decency as possible, and try not to dwell on God standing over us with a giant shovel. Bye!

%

Ma muse
(Jean-Claude Pascal - Nous les amoureux - 1961)

En flânant dans l'île Saint-Louis
J'ai r'trouvé ma muse

Je vais vous dire ce qu'elle m'a dit
Si ça vous amuse
Elle se baladait par là
On n' sait pas pourquoi
Je lui ai fait "Comment ça va?"
Elle m'a dit "Et toi?

Depuis l' temps qu'on n' s'est pas vu
Comment va ta flemme?
J' crois bien qu'on s'était perdus
Au coin d'un poème
Un de ceux qu' tu ne finis jamais
Où y a trop à dire
Où y a trop ou pas assez
Tu me f'ras toujours rire

Veux-tu qu'on fasse un p'tit bout
De chemin ensemble
En souvenir du temps si doux
Si doux que j'en tremble
Où l'on s'entendait si bien
À chercher des rimes
Et des mots pour les copains
Pour tous ceux qui triment

Tu te contentais alors
De petites chansonnettes
Et comme ça te rapportait d' l'or
Tu trouvais ça bête
Tu pensais que c'était trop petit
De jouer sur ta vielle
Tu rêvais d'Audiberti
Et de Supervielle

Et puis y a eu les p'tits gars
Qui refont le monde
Avec une guitare sous le bras
Pleine d'idées profondes
T'as failli te mettre au pli
Les suivre à la piste
Et t'acheter la panoplie
Du p'tit anarchiste

Oubliant que pour ce boulot
On a eu Voltaire
Beaumarchais, Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Derrière eux, faut se taire
Car chanter la liberté
C'est toute une affaire
Suffit pas d' bonne volonté
Faut du savoir-faire

Enfin y a eu les Tom' toms
Du fin fond d' l'Afrique
Exportés par l'oncle Tom
Jusque en Amérique
En surplus on nous les r'ssert
Mais qu'est-ce que ça change
Un certain docteur Schweitzer
Joue du Bach aux anges"

En flânant dans l'île Saint-Louis
J'ai r'trouvé ma muse
Je vais vous dire ce qu'elle m'a dit
Si ça vous amuse
Elle m'a dit "Viens à Nogent
On va faire la fête
Et s'offrir un p'tit vin blanc
Par dessus les têtes"

%

Peasant's lament
(Atomic Guava - Peasants of the future - 2022)

Through weather and storms and the pull of the waves
The words of my father and figure remain
Etched in my palm as the tears filled his eyes
I'll be your strong shoulder as long as you’re mine

My heart hangs heavy and low
Sheltered myself in a fruit that explodes
Like the anger bottled inside of my chest
Until the end, my friends, anchors away

The howl of the tempest and bite from the cold
None strong as the warmth from my good brother's hold
The whips from my rivals and foes melt away
As he sings to me here by your side I will stay

My heart hangs heavy and low
Sheltered myself in a fruit that explodes
Like the anger bottled inside of my chest
Until the end, my friends, anchors away

A round of our vices in silence we raise
My heroine sister too many has braved
Her voice thick with whiskey and smile sweet as wine
She whispers as long as you're here, I’ll be fine

My heart hangs heavy and low
Sheltered myself in a fruit that explodes
Like the anger bottled inside of my chest
Until the end, my friends, anchors away

Golden and gentle in flickers of light
My lover's firm answer cuts clean through the night
No matter the rage of the tide on our shores
I'll love you forever, forever I'm yours

My heart hangs heavy and low
Sheltered myself in a fruit that explodes
Like the anger bottled inside of my chest
Until the end my friends, until we meet again
Anchors away my friends, anchors away
