Ne vous mariez pas les filles
(Boris Vian - 1956)

Avez-vous vu un homme à poil
Sortir soudain d'la salle de bains
Dégoulinant par tous les poils
Et la moustache pleine de chagrin ?
Avez-vous vu un homme bien laid
En train d'manger des spaghetti
Fourchette au poing, l'air abruti
D'la sauce tomate sur son gilet
Quand ils sont beaux, ils sont idiots
Quand ils sont vieux, ils sont affreux
Quand ils sont grands, ils sont feignants
Quand ils sont p'tits, ils sont méchants
Avez-vous vu un homme trop gros
Extraire ses jambes de son dodo
S'masser l'ventre et s'gratter les tifs
En r'gardant ses pieds l'air pensif ?

Ne vous mariez pas, les filles, ne vous mariez pas
Faites plutôt du cinéma
Restez pucell' chez vot' papa
Dev'nez serveuse chez un bougnat
El'vez des singes, él'vez des chats
Levez la patte à l'Opéra
Vendez des boît' de chocolat
Prenez le voile ou l'prenez pas
Dansez à poil pour les gagas
Soyez radeuse av'nue du Bois
Mais ne vous mariez pas, les filles
Ne vous mariez pas

Avez-vous vu un homme gêné
Rentrer trop tard pour le dîner
Du rouge à lèvres sur son col
Du flageolant dans la guibole
Avez-vous vu au cabaret
Un monsieur qui n'est plus très frais
Se frotter avec insistance
Sur un' petite fleur d'innocence
Quand ils sont bêtes, ils vous embêtent
Quand ils sont forts, ils font du sport
Quand ils sont riches, ils gard'nt l'artiche
Quand ils sont durs, ils vous torturent
Avez-vous vu à votre bras
Un maigrichon aux yeux de rat
Friser ses trois poils de moustache
Et se redresser, l'air bravache

Ne vous mariez pas, les filles, ne vous mariez pas
Mettez vos robes de gala
Allez danser à l'Olympia
Changez d'amant quat' fois par mois
Prenez la braise et gardez-la
Cachez la fraîche sous vos matelas
À cinquante ans ça servira
À vous payer des beaux p'tits gars
Rien dans la tête, tout dans les bras
Ah, la belle vie que ça sera
Si vous n'vous mariez pas, les filles
Si vous n'vous mariez pas

%

Moonchild
(Iron Maiden - Seventh son of a seventh son - 1988)

Seven deadly sins
Seven ways to win
Seven holy paths to hell
And your trip begins

Seven downward slopes
Seven bloodied hopes
Seven are your burning fires
Seven your desires

I am he the born-less one
The fallen angel watching you
Babylon, the scarlet whore
I'll infiltrate your gratitude
Don't you dare to save your son
Kill him now and save the young ones
Be the mother of a birth strangled babe
Be the devils own, Lucifer's my name

Moonchild hear the mandrake scream
Moonchild open the seventh seal

I count the heads of those unborn
The accursed ones I'll find them all
And if you die by your own hand
As a suicide you shall be damned
And if you try to save your soul
I will torment you, you shall not grow old
With every second and passing breath
You'll be so alone your soul will bleed to death

Moonchild hear the mandrake scream
Moonchild open the seventh seal
Moonchild you'll be mine soon child
Moonchild take my hand tonight

The twins they are exhausted, seven is this night
Gemini is rising as the red lips kiss to bite
Seven angels seven demons battle for his soul
When Gabriel lies sleeping, this child was born to die

One more dies one more lives
One baby cries one mother grieves
For all the sins you will commit
You'll beg forgiveness and none I'll give
A web of fear shall be your coat
To clothe you in the night
A lucky escape for you young man
But I'll see you damned in endless night

Moonchild hear the mandrake scream
Moonchild open the seventh seal
Moonchild you'll be mine soon child
Moonchild take my hand tonight

%

Changing of the guards
(Bob Dylan - Street legal - 1978)

Sixteen years
Sixteen banners united over the field
Where the good shepherd grieves
Desperate men, desperate women divided
Spreading their wings 'neath falling leaves.

Fortune calls
I stepped forth from the shadows to the marketplace
Merchants and thieves, hungry for power, my last deal gone down
She's smelling sweet like the meadows where she was born
On midsummer's eve near the tower.

The cold-blooded moon
The captain waits above the celebration
Sending his thoughts to a beloved maid
Whose ebony face is beyond communication
The captain is down but still believing that his love will be repaid.

They shaved her head
She was torn between Jupiter and Apollo
A messenger arrived with a black nightingale
I seen her on the stairs and I couldn't help but follow
Follow her down past the fountain where they lifted her veil.

I stumbled to my feet
I rode past destruction in the ditches
With the stitches still mending beneath a heart-shaped tattoo
Renegade priests and treacherous young witches
Were handing out the flowers that I'd given to you.

The palace of mirrors
Where dog soldiers are reflected
The endless road and the wailing of chimes
The empty rooms where her memory is protected
Where the angel's voices whisper to the souls of previous times.

She wakes him up
Forty-eight hours later the sun is breaking
Near broken chains, mountain laurel and rolling rocks
She's begging to know what measures he now will be taking
He's pulling her down and she's clutching on to his long golden locks.
Gentlemen, he said I don't need your organization, I've shined your shoes
I've moved your mountains and marked your cards
But Eden is burning either brace yourself for elimination
Or else your hearts must have the courage for the changing of the guards.

Peace will come
With tranquillity and splendor on the wheels of fire
But will bring us no reward when her false idols fall
And cruel death surrenders with its pale ghost retreating
Between the King and the Queen of Swords.

%

Cruel sister
(Pentangle - Cruel Sister - 1970)

There lived a lady by the North Sea shore
(Lay the bent to the bonnie broom)
Two daughters were the babes she bore
(Fa la la la la la la la la la)

As one grew bright as is the sun,
So coal black grew the elder one.

A knight came riding to the lady's door,
He'd travelled far to be their wooer.

He courted one with gloves and rings,
But he loved the other above all things.

Oh sister will you go with me
To watch the ships sail on the sea?

She took her sister by the hand
And led her down to the North Sea strand.

And as they stood on the windy shore
The dark girl threw her sister o'er.

Sometimes she sank, sometimes she swam,
Crying, "Sister, reach to me your hand!

"Oh Sister, Sister, let me live,
And all that's mine I'll surely give."

"(It's) your own true love that I'll have and more,
But thou shalt never come ashore."

And there she floated like a swan,
The salt sea bore her body on.

Two minstrels walked along the strand
And saw the maiden float to land.

They made a harp of her breastbone,
Whose sound would melt a heart of stone.

They took three locks of her yellow hair,
And with them strung the harp so rare.

They went into her father's hall
To play the harp before them all,

But when they laid it on a stone
The harp began to play alone.

The first string sang a doleful sound:
"The bride her younger sister drowned."

The second string as that they tried,
In terror sits the black-haired bride.

The third string sang beneath their bow,
"And surely now her tears will flow".

%

This is Halloween
(Dany Elfman - The nightmare before Christmas - 1993)

Boys and girls of every age
Wouldn't you like to see something strange

Come with us and you will see
This our town of Halloween

This is Halloween This is Halloween
Pumpkins scream in the dead of night

This is Halloween, everybody make a scene
Trick or treat 'til the neighbors gonna die of fright
Everybody scream!
In our town of halloween
I am the one hiding under your bed
Teeth ground sharp and eyes glowing red

I am the one hiding under your stairs
Fingers like snakes and spiders in my hair

This is Halloween This is Halloween
Halloween! Halloween! Halloween!

In this town we call home
Everyone hail to the pumpkin song

In this town, don't we love it now
Everyone's waiting for the next surprise

Round that corner man, hiding in the trash can
Something's waiting now to pounce and how'll you'll

Scream! This is Halloween
Red 'n Black and slimy green

Aren't you scared?

Well that's just fine
Say it once say it twice
Take a chance and roll the dice
Ride with the moon in the dead of night

Everybody scream! Everybody scream!

In our town of halloween

I am the clown with the tear-away face
Here in a flash and gone without a trace

I am the 'who' when you call 'whos there? '
I am the wind blowing through your hair

I am the shadow on the moon at night
Filling your dreams to the brim with fright

This Halloween This is Halloween
Halloween! Halloween! Halloween!

Tender lumplings everywhere
Life's no fun without a good scare

That's our job, but we're not mean
In our town of Halloween

In this town...

Don't we love it now?

Everyone's waiting for the next surprise!

Skeleton Jack might catch you in the back
And scream like a banshee
Make you jump out of your skin
This is Halloween, everybody scream
Would you please make way for very special guy

Our man Jack is king of the Pumpkin Patch
Everyone hail to the Pumpkin King now

This is Halloween This Halloween
Halloween! Halloween! Halloween!

In this townwe call home
Everyone hail to the pumpkin song

Yay!

%

Fugazi
(Marillion - Fugazi - 1984)

Vodka intimate, an affair with isolation in a Blackheath cell
Extinguishing the fires in a private hell
Provoking the heartache to renew the licence
Of a bleeding heart poet in a fragile capsule
Propping up the crust of the glitter conscience
Wrapped in the christening shawl of a hangover
Baptised in the tears from the real

Drowning in the liquid seize on the Piccadilly line, rat race
Scuttling through the damp electric labyrinth
Caress Ophelia's hand with breathstroke ambition
An albatross in the marrytime tradition
Sheathed within the Walkman wear the halo of distortion
Aural contraceptive aborting pregnant conversation
She turned the harpoon and it pierced my heart
She hung herself around my neck
From the Time-Life-Guardians in their conscience bubbles
Safe and dry in my sea of troubles
Nine to five with suitable ties
Cast adrift as their side-show, peepshow, stereo hero
Becalm bestill, bewitch, drowning in the real

The thief of Baghdad hides in Islington now
Praying deportation for his sacred cow
A legacy of romance from a twilight world
The dowry of a relative mystery girl
A Vietnamese flower, a Dockland union
A mistress of release from a magazine's thighs
Magdalenes contracts more than favours
The feeding hands of western promise hold her by the throat

A son of a swastika of '45 parading a peroxide standard
Graffiti conjure disciples testaments of hatred
Aerosol wands whisper where the searchlights trim the barbed wire hedges
This is Brixton chess
A knight for Embankment folds his newspaper castle
A creature of habit, begs the boatman's coin
He'll fade with old soldiers in the grease stained roll call
And linger with the heartburn of Good Friday's last supper

Son watches father scan obituary columns in search of absent school friends
While his generation digests high fibre ignorance
Cowering behind curtains and the taped up painted windows
Decriminalised genocide, provided door to door Belsens
Pandora's box of holocausts gracefully cruising satellite infested heavens
Waiting, the season of the button, the penultimate migration
Radioactive perfumes, for the fashionably, for the terminally insane, insane
Do you realise? Do you realise?
Do you realise, this world is totally fugazi

Where are the prophets, where are the visionaries, where are the poets
To breach the dawn of the sentimental mercenary

%

J'accuse
(Damien Saez - J'accuse - 2010)
 
Faut du gasoil dans la bagnole,
La carte bleue dans la chatte,
Faut de la dinde pour noël,
Faut bronzer pendant les vacances
Faut du forfait faut du forfait,
Pour oublier la solitude,
Faut des gonzesses à la télé,
Ouais faut des pilules pour bander,
Faut du gazon dans les tabacs,
Il faudrait arrêter d'fumer,
La salle de sport sur des machines,
Faut s'essouffler faut s'entraîner,
Faut marcher dans les clous,
Faut pas boire au volant,
Faut dépenser les p'tits sous,
Faut du réseau pour les enfants,
Faut ressembler à des guignols,
Faut que tu passes à la télé,
Pour rentrer dans les farandoles,
De ceux qui ont le blé...
J'me balade dans les grandes surfaces,
J'ai pas assez mais faut payer,
Je cours au gré des accessoires
Et des conneries illimitées,

Les gens parlent mal les gens sont cons,
Au moins tout aussi cons que moi,
A se faire mettre à s'faire baiser,
Sûr de s'faire enfanter
Des bébés par des hologrammes,
Des mots d'amour par satellite,
Mais ces connards ils savent pas lire,
Ils savent même pas se nourrir,
Des OGM dans les biberons,
Ouais c'est tant mieux ça f'ra moins de cons,
Quand ils crèveront en mutation,
Des grippes porcines sur des cochons.

Oh non l'homme descend pas du singe,
Il descend plutôt du mouton,
Oh non l'homme descend pas du singe,
Il descend plutôt du mouton...

Faut marcher dans les clous,
Faut pas boire au volant,
Faut dépenser ses p'tits sous,
Faut du réseau pour tes enfants,
Faut ressembler à des guignols,
Faut passer à la télé,
Faut rentrer dans les farandoles
De ceux qui font le blé...

Il parait qu'il faut virer les profs,
Et puis les travailleurs sociaux,
Les fonctionnaires qui servent à rien,
Les infirmières à 1000 euros,
Faut qu'ça rapporte aux actionnaires,
La santé et les hôpitaux,
Va t'faire soigner en Angleterre,
Va voir la gueule de leurs métros,
Faut qu'on se fasse une raison,
On a loupé nos transactions,
On s'est laissés prendre le cul,
Par nos besoins nos religions,
Il faut foutre le portables aux chiottes,
Et des coup d'pioche dans la télé,
Faut mettre les menottes
A chaque présentateur du JT...

J'accuse !
Au mégaphone dans l'assemblée !
J'accuse ! J'accuse ! J'accuse !
Au mégaphone dans l'assemblée !

Faut du gasoil dans la bagnole,
La carte bleue dans la chatte,
Faut de la dinde pour noël,
Faut bronzer pendant les vacances
Faut du forfait faut du forfait,
Faudrait de l'herbe dans les tabacs,
La salle de sport sur des machines,
Faut s'essouffler faut s'entraîner,
J'me balade dans les grandes surfaces,
J'ai pas assez mais faut payer,
Je cours au gré des accessoires,
Et des conneries illimitées,
J'me balade dans les grandes surfaces,
J'ai pas assez mais faut payer,
Je cours au gré des accessoires,
Et des conneries illimitées...

%

Loterie
(Fauve - Vieux Frères, partie 1 - 2014)

De ma fenêtre je vois les élèves du lycée Rodin qui sortent de cours en poussant des cris de joie
Les garçons paradent ils ont l'air pleins de sève et les leggings des filles serrent leurs jambes et leurs fesses encore fermes
J'aurais bien aimé connaître le lycée public apprendre la vie au bon moment être à l'aise un peu couillu et effronté faire ma puberté dans les temps
Piquer des trucs dans les supermarchés perdre mon pucelage tôt me prendre des droites et en donner quelques-unes en retour sans m'écraser

Mais ça a pas été le cas non loin de là moi j'étais plutôt de ceux qui rasent les murs qui font pas de vagues un genre de grenade
Un gentil petit collabo coincé du cul et peureux comme y a pas qui fait tout bien comme on lui demande qui se lève tôt se couche tôt et travaille quand il faut
Mes parents m'ont pas forcé j'ai fait ça tout seul comme un grand puis je me suis obstiné durant des années forcément ça a fini par me jouer des tours
Depuis j'essaie de faire avec j'essaie de faire dévier le sillon ce sera pas facile non heureusement je suis pas seul pour faire taire la voix qui me répète :

« Tu seras lâche et impuissant résigné soumis déprimant insuffisant pas adapté spectateur dans le fossé
Tu seras tout seul divorcé sans enfants remarié alcoolo adultère fils indigne mauvais frère
Tu seras amer trop sévère malheureux toujours en colère méprisable imbuvable égoïste insupportable
Tu seras ce qu'on te dit tu discutes pas ici-bas c'est comme ça
T'as compris le jeu petit merdeux ? C'est la roulette tu choisis pas »

Ah ouais ? Tu crois ça ?
Et bah écoute je sais pas pour toi mais pour moi ce sera
La tête haute un poing sur la table et l'autre en l'air fais-moi confiance avant de finir six pieds sous terre
J'aurai vécu tout ce qu'il y a à vivre et j'aurai fait tout ce que je peux faire
Tenté tout ce qu'il y à tenter et surtout j'aurais aimé

De ma fenêtre je vois les gens qui partent au taff il y en a qui ont fière allure avec leurs beaux manteaux et leurs belles chaussures
D'autres au contraire ont l'air de ramasser sévère toutes celles et ceux qui s'en vont une fois de plus servir la soupe aux autres
Ma conscience de petit blanc me rattrape aussitôt : « Tu vois ? Tu devrais arrêter de te plaindre »
Et pourtant je ne sais pas est-ce que c'est nous qui sommes devenus des baltringues ou bien est-ce que c'est le monde qui part en vrille ?
Parfois je me dis qu'on nous a tellement habitués au goût de la culpabilité qu'on est devenus incapables d'y voir clair

Par exemple moi pendant longtemps je me suis acharné à me ranger dans une boîte à avoir une vie normale sans accrocs sans risques sans drames
Avoir un métier normal un salaire normal des sentiments normaux une femme normale une mort normale etc, etc.
Mais j'ai pas pu c'était trop pour moi j'étais pas assez endurant alors à la place j'ai cherché une feinte pour vivre dignement et aujourd'hui je me saigne

Pour essayer d'aider les miens de la bonne façon d'agir selon des nobles fins et un jour enfin donner tort à cette voix qui me répète :

« Tu seras dominant ou noyé écrasant ou écrasé carnassier ou dispensable gagnant ou donnée négligeable
Tu seras semblable à tes semblables comme tout le monde ou dégradable plus malin ou trou du cul tortionnaire ou corrompu
Tu seras battu et silencieux ou bien cruel mais victorieux rigoureux ou inutile féroce ou détail futile
Tu seras ce qu'on te dit tu discutes pas ici-bas c'est comme ça
T'as compris le jeu petit merdeux ? C'est la roulette tu choisis pas »

Ah ouais ? Tu crois ça ?
Et bah écoute je sais pas pour toi mais pour moi ce sera
La tête haute un poing sur la table et l'autre en l'air fais-moi confiance avant de finir six pieds sous terre
J'aurai vécu tout ce qu'il y a à vivre et j'aurai fait tout ce que je peux faire
Tenté tout ce qu'il y à tenter et surtout et surtout j'aurais aimé

De ma fenêtre, je vois un bout de l'enceinte de l'hôpital
Si je penche un peu la tête je peux peut-être arriver à voir le bâtiment des consultations
Je repense à toutes ces fois où on m'a dit : « T'es trop sensible mais ça va aller fais pas cette tête... Bon OK ce sera pas tous les jours la fête »
Et le docteur de la tête qui me répète que c'est comme ça qu'il faut que je l'accepte que c'est comme le diabète qui faut vivre avec
Alors j'essaie chaque jour que Dieu fait et j'ai pas dit mon dernier mot t'inquiète y a rien d'écrit et nique la voix qui me dit :

« Tu seras schizo bipolaire trop fragile suicidaire tyrannique incurable repoussant pas regardable
Tu seras sadique narcissique voyeur pervers égocentrique destructeur dépressif obsessionnel compulsif
Tu seras damné condamné étendu sur la chaussée déformé mal branlé démoli trois fois rejeté
Tu seras ce qu'on te dit tu discutes pas ici-bas c'est comme ça
T'as compris le jeu petit merdeux ? C'est la roulette tu choisis pas »

Ah ouais ? Tu crois ça ?
Et bah écoute je sais pas pour toi mais pour moi ce sera
La tête haute les couilles sur la table le poing en l'air fais-moi confiance avant de finir six pieds sous terre
J'aurai vécu tout ce qu'il y a à vivre et j'aurai fait tout ce que je peux faire
Tenté tout ce qu'il y à tenter et surtout on m'aura aimé

%

Impossible
(La rue Kétanou - Ouvert à double tour - 2003)

C'était bien à Ménilmontant qu'on avait l'impression de descendre
Et tel que c'était parti c'était pas fait pour revenir
On était des vrais aveugles avec les idées claires
Aujourd'hui impossible d'arrêter cette chanson

D'ailleurs est-ce vraiment une chanson ou juste l'espoir d'une évasion
D'un monde qui tourne si bien avec de l'imagination
Avant qu'on se casse d'ici je reste pour casser des verres
Rattrapez ceux qui fuient la vie et dites-leur qu'on reste ouvert

Y'en a qui trouvent ça joli parce qu'on a le droit de dire merde
Ca revendique à moitié prix rebelle en herbe, veut protested
Universelle que l'on veut pour continuer une chanson
Il faudra pas fermer les yeux pour qu'on fasse encore des prisons

Est-ce qu'on a des têtes d'affiches on vous l'demande sans déconner
Même si on s'arrache la gueule à gueuler qu'il faut s'accrocher
S'accrocher des oreilles au coeur pour que l'on puisse enfin s'entendre
Rire du pire et du meilleur et sourit qui veut bien l'entendre

Ne pissez pas sur le piano il n'y pousse plus de chansonnette
Si on le trouve un peu trop haut on peut toujours lui faire sa fête (ouais lui scier les pieds)
Et on chantera ici-bas pour continuer sans oublier
Que la guerre va faire un tabac et qu'on pourra l'enregistrer

Allez déballe sur le comptoir pour un peu on file une étoile
Qu'on continue le tintamarre pour un petit bout de maroilles
Allez déballe vide ton sac qu'on puisse le remplir d'ailleurs
De toutes façons y'a une arnaque en tout cas elle court la rumeur

Les chansons n'appartiennent qu'à ceux qui les laissent s'envoyager
Pour qu'on puisse encore les chanter sans qu'elles aient besoin de papier
Et tout le monde pourra les entendre si nos oreilles sont accrochées
Aux coeurs qui battent la mesure du temps qui ne veut pas s'arrêter

On était des vrais aveugles avec les idées claires
Aujourd'hui impossible d'arrêter cette chanson

Mais impossible n'est pas français !

%

A ma femme endormie
(Charles Cros - Musique: Sarclo - Sarclosolo - 1991)

Tu dors en croyant que mes vers 
Vont encombrer tout l'univers 
De désastres et d'incendies ; 
Elles sont si rares pourtant 
Mes chansons au soleil couchant 
Et mes lointaines mélodies.

Mais si je dérange parfois 
La sérénité des cieux froids, 
Si des sons d'acier ou de cuivre 
Ou d'or, vibrent dans mes chansons, 
Pardonne ces hautes façons,
C'est que je me hâte de vivre.

Et puis tu m'aimeras toujours. 
Éternelles sont les amours
Dont ma mémoire est le repaire ; 
Nos enfants seront de fiers gas 
Qui répareront les dégâts, 
Oue dans ta vie a faits leur père.

Ils dorment sans rêver à rien,
Dans le nuage aérien
Des cheveux sur leurs fines têtes ; 
Et toi, près d'eux, tu dors aussi,
Ayant oublié, le souci 
De tout travail, de toutes dettes.

Moi je veille et je fais ces vers 
Qui laisseront tout l'univers 
Sans désastre et sans incendie ; 
Et demain, au soleil montant 
Tu souriras en écoutant 
Cette tranquille mélodie.

%

Smoke on the Water
(Deep purple - Machine Head - 1972)

We all came out to Montreux
On the Lake Geneva shoreline
To make records with a mobile
We didn't have much time
Frank Zappa and the Mothers
Were at the best place around
But some stupid with a flare gun
Burned the place to the ground

Smoke on the water, a fire in the sky
Smoke on the water

They burned down the gambling house
It died with an awful sound
Funky Claude was running in and out
Pulling kids out the ground
When it all was over
We had to find another place
But Swiss time was running out
It seemed that we would lose the race

Smoke on the water, a fire in the sky
Smoke on the water

We ended up at the Grand Hotel
It was empty, cold and bare
But with the Rolling truck Stones thing just outside
Making our music there
With a few red lights, a few old beds
We made a place to sweat
No matter what we get out of this
I know, I know we'll never forget

Smoke on the water, a fire in the sky
Smoke on the water

%

A horse with no name
(America - America - 1971)

On the first part of the journey
I was looking at all the life
There were plants and birds and rocks and things
There was sand and hills and rings
The first thing I met was a fly with a buzz
And the sky with no clouds
The heat was hot and the ground was dry
But the air was full of sound

I've been through the desert on a horse with no name
It felt good to be out of the rain
In the desert you can remember your name
'Cause there ain't no one for to give you no pain

After two days in the desert sun
My skin began to turn red
After three days in the desert fun
I was looking at a river bed
And the story it told of a river that flowed
Made me sad to think it was dead

You see I've been through the desert on a horse with no name
It felt good to be out of the rain
In the desert you can remember your name
'Cause there ain't no one for to give you no pain

After nine days I let the horse run free
'Cause the desert had turned to sea
There were plants and birds and rocks and things
there was sand and hills and rings
The ocean is a desert with it's life underground
And a perfect disguise above
Under the cities lies a heart made of ground
But the humans will give no love

You see I've been through the desert on a horse with no name
It felt good to be out of the rain
In the desert you can remember your name
'Cause there ain't no one for to give you no pain

%

Tennesse stud
(Jimmy Driftwood - 1959)

Back about eighteen and twenty-five
I left Tennessee very much alive
I never would've made it through the Arkansas mud
If I hadn't been riding on the Tennessee Stud

Had some trouble with my sweetheart's Pa
One of her brothers was a bad outlaw
I wrote a letter to my Uncle Spud And
I rode away on the Tennessee Stud

The Tennessee Stud was long and lean
The color of the sun and his eyes were green
He had the nerve and he had the blood
There never was a horse like Tennessee Stud

Drifted on down into no man's land
Across the river called the Rio Grande
Raced my horse with the Spaniard's foe
Til I got me a skin full of silver and gold

Me and the gambler, we couldn't agree
We got in a fight over Tennessee
Pulled our guns and he fell with a thud
And I rode away on a Tennessee Stud

The Tennessee Stud was long and lean
The color of the sun and his eyes were green
He had the nerve and he had the blood
There was never a horse like the Tennessee Stud

I rode right back across Arkansas
I whipped her brother and I whipped her Pa
I found that girl with the golden hair
She was riding on a Tennessee Mare

Pretty little baby on the cabin floor
Little horse colt playing round the door
I loved the girl with the golden hair
And the Tennessee Stud loves the Tennessee Mare

The Tennessee Stud was long and lean
The color of the sun and his eyes were green
He had the nerve and he had the blood
There was never a horse like the Tennessee Stud

%

Faut s'oublier
(Damien Saez - Messina - 2014)

Entre le marteau et l'enclume
Entre la rue et la fortune
Entre le triste du trottoir
Entre le vin et l'illusoire
Entre les goudrons et le ciel
Les tourteraux, les tourterelles
Entre les taxis sur leur terre
Entre tes os et puis ma chair
Entre nos corps et puis nos coeurs
Entre ton rire et puis mes pleurs
Entre les chats blancs, les chats noirs
Entre les verres et les comptoirs
Entre l'ivresse et les sanglots
Entre les caresses et les crocs
Les passants miséricordieux
Entre les fois et les bons dieux
Entre nos crimes et puis nos cris
Et c'est fini les infinis
Entre la cuillère et la drogue
Sur les boulevards vont nos pirogues
Entre nous deux, entre les feux
Entre les non-dits de tes yeux
Entre les coups, entre les clous
Entre les fous puis entre nous
Entre le printemps et l'hiver
Ce qui nous blesse, ce qui est cher
Entre les fêtes et les défaites
Entre les temps et les tempêtes
Entre les je t'aime et les mots
Qui font chavirer nos bateaux
Entre l'océan et la plage
Entre la plume et puis la page

Faut s'oublier
S'évader
Se réchauffer avec des mots d'amour
S'oublier
Se déchirer
S'embrasser comme au dernier jour

Ici c'est le règne des choses
A bouffer jusqu'aux overdoses
Mais si ces deux-là s'en foutent
Puisque s'aimer jamais ne coûte
Dans les rues aux mauvaises étoiles
Sur les avenues, bateaux sans voiles
Les ivrognes aiment bien naviguer
Comme des soleils aux champs de blé
Et si nos yeux aiment bien pleurer
C'est parce-que nous, nous aimons nous aimer

Nous oublier
Nous évader
Nous embrasser comme au dernier jour
Nous oublier
Nous déchirer
Nous réchauffer avec des mots d'amour

Entre les deux amants c'est la rue qui s'incline
S'ils n'ont pas d'argent, c'est la pluie orpheline
Ils font les enfants qui sauveront le monde
Ils durent au présent puisqu'à chaque seconde
Ils se disent des choses qui font tourner les terres
Il n'y a jamais de pauses à leurs chants des mystères
Ils sont beaux, ils sont laids, leurs cheveux pleins de poux
Et pourtant qu'ils sont beaux, ceux qui n'ont pas le sou
Et si toi tu veux avec moi, oui, danser comme eux
Sur les toits sans l'abri, avec moi si tu veux
Devenir roi du ciel, et toi reine d'un jour
Au lever du soleil, pour sauver notre amour

Faut s'oublier
Faut s'évader
S'embrasser comme au premier jour
Faut s'oublier
Se déchirer
Se réchauffer avec des mots d'amour
Nous oublier
Nous évader
Nous embrasser comme au premier jour

%

Alligators 427
(Hubert-Félix Thiéfaine - Autorisation de délirer - 1979)

Alligators 427
Aux ailes de cachemire safran,
Je grille ma dernière cigarette.
Je vous attends.
Sur cette autoroute hystérique
Qui nous conduit chez les mutants,
J'ai troqué mon coeur contre une trique.
Je vous attends.
Je sais que vous avez la beauté destructive
Et le sourire vainqueur jusqu'au dernier soupir.
Je sais que vos mâchoires distillent l'agonie.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort !"

Alligators 427
À la queue de zinc et de sang,
Je m'tape une petite reniflette.
Je vous attends.
Dans cet étrange carnaval
On a vendu l'homo sapiens
Pour racheter du Neandertal.
Je vous attends.
Et les manufactures ont beau se recycler,
Y aura jamais assez de morphine pour tout le monde,
Surtout qu'à ce qu'on dit, vous aimez faire durer.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort !"

Alligators 427
Aux longs regards phosphorescents,
Je mouche mon nez, remonte mes chaussettes.
Je vous attends.
Et je bloque mes lendemains.
Je sais que les mouches s'apprêtent,
Autour des tables du festin.
Je vous attends.
Et j'attends que se dressent vos prochains charniers.
J'ai raté l'autre guerre pour la photographie.
J'espère que vos macchabées seront bien faisandés.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort !"

Alligators 427
Aux crocs venimeux et gluants,
Je donne un coup de brosse à mon squelette.
Je vous attends.
L'idiot du village fait la queue
Et tend sa carte d'adhérent
Pour prendre place dans le grand feu.
Je vous attends.
J'entends siffler le vent au-dessus des calvaires
Et je vois les vampires sortir de leurs cercueils
Pour venir saluer les anges nucléaires.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort !"

Alligators 427
Aux griffes d'or et de diamant,
Je sais que la ciguë est prête.
Je vous attends.
Je sais que dans votre alchimie,
L'atome ça vaut des travellers chèques
Et ça suffit comme alibi.
Je vous attends.
A l'ombre de vos centrales, je crache mon cancer.
Je cherche un nouveau nom pour ma métamorphose.
Je sais que mes enfants s'appelleront vers de terre.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort !"

Alligators 427
Au cerveau de jaspe et d'argent,
Il est temps de sonner la fête.
Je vous attends.
Vous avez le goût du grand art
Et sur mon compteur électrique,
J'ai le portrait du prince-ringard.
Je vous attends.
Je sais que, désormais, vivre est un calembour.
La mort est devenue un état permanent.
Le monde est aux fantômes, aux hyènes et aux vautours.
Moi je vous dis : "bravo" et "vive la mort !" 

%

Life on Mars
(David Bowie - Hunky Dory - 1979)

It's a God-awful small affair
To the girl with the mousy hair
But her mummy is yelling no
And her daddy has told her to go

But her friend is nowhere to be seen
Now she walks through her sunken dream
To the seat with the clearest view
And she's hooked to the silver screen

But the film is a saddening bore
For she's lived it ten times or more
She could spit in the eyes of fools
As they ask her to focus on

Sailors fighting in the dance hall
Oh man, look at those cavemen go
It's the freakiest show
Take a look at the lawman
Beating up the wrong guy
Oh man, wonder if he'll ever know
He's in the best selling show
Is there life on Mars?

It's on America's tortured brow
That Mickey Mouse has grown up a cow
Now the workers have struck for fame
'Cause Lennon's on sale again

See the mice in their million hordes
From Ibiza to the Norfolk Broads
Rule Britannia is out of bounds
To my mother, my dog, and clowns

But the film is a saddening bore
'Cause I wrote it ten times or more
It's about to be writ again
As I ask you to focus on

Sailors fighting in the dance hall
Oh man, look at those cavemen go
It's the freakiest show
Take a look at the lawman
Beating up the wrong guy
Oh man, wonder if he'll ever know
He's in the best selling show
Is there life on Mars?

%

Sentimental
(Porcupine tree - Fear of a blank planet - 2007)

Never want to be old
And I don't want dependence
It's no fun to be told
That you can't blame your parents anymore

I'm finding it hard
To hang from a star
Don't want to be
Never want to be old

Sullen and bored the kids stay
And in this way they wish away each day?
Stoned in the mall the kids play
And in this way wish away each day?

I don't really know
If I care what is normal
And I'm not really sure
If the pills I've been taking are helping

I'm wasting my life
Hurting inside
I don't really know
And I'm not really sure

Sullen and bored the kids stay
And in this way they wish away each day?
Stoned in the mall the kids play
And in this way wish away each day?

%

Eleanor Rigby
(The Beatles - Revolver - 1966)

Eleanor Rigby, picks up the rice
in the church where a wedding has been
Lives in a dream
Waits at the window, wearing the face
that she keeps in a jar by the door
Who is it for

All the lonely people
Where do they all come from?
All the lonely people
Where do they all belong?

Father McKenzie, writing the words
of a sermon that no one will hear
No one comes near
Look at him working, darning his socks
in the night when there's nobody there
What does he care

All the lonely people
Where do they all come from?
All the lonely people
Where do they all belong?

Ah, look at all the lonely people
Ah, look at all the lonely people

Eleanor Rigby, died in the church
and was buried along with her name
Nobody came
Father McKenzie, wiping the dirt
from his hands as he walks from the grave
No one was saved

All the lonely people
Where do they all come from?
All the lonely people
Where do they all belong?

%

Sympathy for the devil
(The Rolling Stones - Beggars banquet - 1968)

Please allow me to introduce myself
I'm a man of wealth and taste
I've been around for a long, long year
Stole many a man's soul and faith
And I was 'round when Jesus Christ
Had his moment of doubt and pain
Made damn sure that Pilate
Washed his hands and sealed his fate

Pleased to meet you, hope you guess my name
But what's puzzling you is the nature of my game

I stuck around St. Petersburg
When I saw it was a time for a change
Killed the Czar and his ministers
Anastasia screamed in vain
I rode a tank, held a general's rank
When the Blitzkrieg raged and the bodies stank

Pleased to meet you, hope you guess my name
But what's puzzling you is the nature of my game

I watched with glee while your kings and queens
Fought for ten decades for the gods they made
I shouted out, "Who killed the Kennedys?"
When after all, it was you and me
Let me please introduce myself
I'm a man of wealth and taste
And I laid traps for troubadours
Who get killed before they reach Bombay

Pleased to meet you, hope you guess my name
But what's puzzling you is the nature of my game

Oh yeah, get down heavy!

Pleased to meet you, hope you guess my name, oh yeah
But what's confusin' you is just the nature of my game

Just as every cop is a criminal
And all the sinners saints
As heads is tails, just call me Lucifer
Cause I'm in need of some restraint
So if you meet me, have some courtesy
Have some sympathy, and some taste
Use all your well-learned politesse
Or I'll lay your soul to waste

Pleased to meet you, hope you guessed my name
But what's puzzling you is the nature of my game

%

Suzanne
(Leonard Cohen - Songs of Leonard Cohen - 1967)

Suzanne takes you down to her place near the river
You can hear the boats go by, you can spend the night forever
And you know that she's half-crazy but that's why you want to be there
And she feeds you tea and oranges that come all the way from China
And just when you mean to tell her that you have no love to give her
Then he gets you on her wavelength
And she lets the river answer that you've always been her lover

And you want to travel with her, and you want to travel blind
And you know that she will trust you
For you've touched her perfect body with your mind

And Jesus was a sailor when he walked upon the water
And he spent a long time watching from his lonely wooden tower
And when he knew for certain only drowning men could see him
He said all men will be sailors then until the sea shall free them
But he himself was broken, long before the sky would open
Forsaken, almost human, he sank beneath your wisdom like a stone

And you want to travel with him, and you want to travel blind
And you think you maybe you'll trust him
For he's touched your perfect body with her mind

Now, Suzanne takes your hand and she leads you to the river
She's wearing rags and feathers from Salvation Army counters
And the sun pours down like honey on our lady of the harbor
And she shows you where to look among the garbage and the flowers
There are heroes in the seaweed, there are children in the morning
They are leaning out for love and they will lean that way forever
While Suzanne holds her mirror

And you want to travel with her, and you want to travel blind
And you know that you can trust her
For she's touched your perfect body with her mind

%

Aucun Express
(Alain Bashung - Fantaisie militaire - 1998)

Aucun express ne m'emmènera
Vers la félicité
Aucun tacot n'y accostera
Aucun Concorde n'aura ton envergure
Aucun navire n'y va
Sinon toi

Aucun trolley ne me tiendra
Si haut perché
Aucun vapeur ne me fera fondre
Des escalators au chariot ailé
J'ai tout essayé
J'ai tout essayé

J'ai longé ton corps
Épousé ses méandres
Je me suis emporté
Transporté
Par delà les abysses
Par dessus les vergers
Délaissant les grands axes
J'ai pris la contre-allée
Je me suis emporté
Transporté

Aucun landau ne me laissera
Bouche bée
Aucun Walhalla ne vaut le détour
Aucun astronef ne s'y attarde
Aucun navire n'y va
Sinon toi

J'ai longé ton corps
Épousé ses méandres
Je me suis emporté
Transporté
Par delà les abysses
Par dessus les vergers
Délaissant les grands axes
J'ai pris la contre-allée
Je me suis emporté
Transporté

Aucun express ne m'emmènera vers
la félicité
Aucun tacot n'y accostera
Aucun Concorde n'aura ton envergure
Aucun navire n'y va
Aucun

J'ai longé ton corps
Épousé ses méandres
Je me suis emporté
Transporté
Par delà les abysses
Par dessus les vergers
Délaissant les grands axes
J'ai pris la contre-allée
Je me suis emporté
Transporté

%

Space oddity
(David Bowie - Space oddity - 1969)

Ground Control to Major Tom
Ground Control to Major Tom
Take your protein pills and put your helmet on
Ground Control to Major Tom (ten, nine, eight, seven, six)
Commencing countdown, engines on (five, four, three)
Check ignition and may God's love be with you (two, one, liftoff)

This is Ground Control to Major Tom
You've really made the grade
And the papers want to know whose shirts you wear
Now it's time to leave the capsule if you dare

"This is Major Tom to Ground Control
I'm stepping through the door
And I'm floating in a most peculiar way
And the stars look very different today

For here
Am I sitting in a tin can
Far above the world
Planet Earth is blue
And there's nothing I can do

Though I'm past one hundred thousand miles
I'm feeling very still
And I think my spaceship knows which way to go
Tell my wife I love her very much she knows

Ground Control to Major Tom
Your circuit's dead, there's something wrong
Can you hear me, Major Tom?
Can you hear me, Major Tom?
Can you hear me, Major Tom?

Can you "Here am I floating 'round my tin can
Far above the moon
Planet Earth is blue
And there's nothing I can do"

%

Les passantes
(Antoine Pol - Musique: Georges Brassens - Fernande - 1972)

Je veux dédier ce poème
A toutes les femmes qu'on aime
Pendant quelques instants secrets
A celles qu'on connait à peine
Qu'un destin différent entraîne
Et qu'on ne retrouve jamais

A celle qu'on voit apparaître
Une seconde à sa fenêtre
Et qui, preste, s'évanouit
Mais dont la svelte silhouette
Est si gracieuse et fluette
Qu'on en demeure épanoui

A la compagne de voyage
Dont les yeux, charmant paysage
Font paraître court le chemin
Qu'on est seul, peut-être, à comprendre
Et qu'on laisse pourtant descendre
Sans avoir effleuré sa main

A la fine et souple valseuse
Qui vous sembla triste et nerveuse
Par une nuit de carnaval
Qui voulu rester inconnue
Et qui n'est jamais revenue
Tournoyer dans un autre bal

A celles qui sont déjà prises
Et qui, vivant des heures grises
Près d'un être trop différent
Vous ont, inutile folie,
Laissé voir la mélancolie
D'un avenir désespérant

Chères images aperçues
Espérances d'un jour déçues
Vous serez dans l'oubli demain
Pour peu que le bonheur survienne
Il est rare qu'on se souvienne
Des épisodes du chemin

Mais si l'on a manqué sa vie
On songe avec un peu d'envie
A tous ces bonheurs entrevus
Aux baisers qu'on n'osa pas prendre
Aux cœurs qui doivent vous attendre
Aux yeux qu'on n'a jamais revus

Alors, aux soirs de lassitude
Tout en peuplant sa solitude
Des fantômes du souvenir
On pleure les lêvres absentes
De toutes ces belles passantes
Que l'on n'a pas su retenir

%

The letter
(Kristin Hersh - Hips and makers - 1994)

September 29th, 1984
Dear so and so
Gather me up because I'm lost
Or I'm back where I started from
I'm crawling on the floor
Rolling on the ground
I might cry, I won't go home

So here's the story
I am turning up in circles
And I'm spinning on my knuckles
Don't forget that there are circles left undone
Very close to me
Forgive me. Comfort me

I'm crawling on the floor
Rolling on the ground

There's a blanket wrapped around my head
I'm moving in a line, it's shaped like this
I'm
I'm holding in my breath, I have a room

Can you tell if I am lying?
Don't forget that I'm living inside
The space where walls and floor meet
A box inside my chest
An animal stuffed with my frustration
Can you hear me?

Don't forget that I'm alone when you're away
You make me act like other people do
Forgive me
Comfort me
You comfort me
You make me die
I'm gonna cry
I won't go home

Don't kill the God of Sadness
Just don't let her get you down
See, the man inside a book I read
Can't handle his own head
So what the hell am I supposed to do?
I'd like to know how he died

My hands are shaking
Don't you love me anymore?
I only need a person, keep my shoulders
Stand around, lie down
Move your hand above the floor

Gather me up because I'm lost
Or I'm back where I started from
I'm crawling on the floor
Rolling on the ground
I'm gonna cry
You look for me

Love, Kristin
P.S. Keep them coming

%

Où on va
(Emzel café / Les obsédés du monde - Le monde en bouteille / Ca déglingue - 2012 / 2017)

On n'sait pas où on va avec nos instruments
On se demande un peu à quoi ça sert au mieux.
A gagner notre croûte ou juste faire un voeu,
Un petit peu des deux pour mieux tracer la route.

On n'a besoin de rien pour apprendre à tourner,
Des petits ronds on n'en fait jamais assez.
Et on en fera encore, pour faire de notre vie
Une jolie petite mort.

On n'sait pas où on va, mais faut bien avouer
Qu'on aime les chansons et surtout les chanter.
Qu'elles racontent de histoire ou bien n'importe quoi,
Qu'elles nous donnent envie de boire ou de se rouler dans les draps.

Le même constat s'impose sur un trottoir ou dans les bois
Vraiment on n'tient pas à grand chose quand on se tient à bout de bras.
Et on chantera encore, pour faire de notre vie
Une jolie petite mort.

Quelle vie d'amour on mène, vide d'amour, l'âme en peine,
Mais vide, aimant quand même, d'aimer la vie, évidemment.
Quelle vie d'amour bordel, qu'on en donne ou qu'on en prenne
On n'en aura jamais assez pour remplir nos corps assoiffés.
Avec un question qui tourne en rond
Où c'est qu'on va aller avec notre envie de chanter.

On n'sait pas où on va mais alors pas du tout,
On sait juste qu'on y va en tenant les deux bouts.
On n'sait pas où on va, mais alors on s'en fout,
On sait juste qu'on y va les jambes pendues à notre cou.

Le même constat s'impose sur un trottoir ou dans les bois
Vraiment on n'tient pas à grand chose quand on se tient à bout de bras.
Et on chantera encore, pour faire de notre vie
Une jolie petite mort.

%

Watch me bleed
(Tears for Fears - The Hurting - 1983)

Heaven comes to he who waits
But I know I’m getting nowhere
And all the deeds of yesterday
Have really helped to pave my way

Though there’s no one near me now
How come everyone can touch me
You see the torture on my brow
Relates to neither here nor now

Watch me bleed
Bleed forever
Although my face is straight, it lies
My body feels the pain and cries

Here the table is not bare
I am full but feeling empty
For all the warmth it feels so cold
For one so young I feel so old

Watch me bleed
Bleed forever
It’s not allowed to be unkind
But still the hate lives in my mind

I’ll make no noise
I’ll hide my pain
I’ll close my eyes
I won’t complain
I’ll lie right back and take the blame
And trie to tell myself I’m living
And when it’s all been said or done
Where do I go ?
Where do I run ?
What’s left of me or anyone when we’ve denied the hurting ?

%

Wish you were here
(Pink Floyd - Wish you were here - 1975)

So, so you think you can tell
Heaven from Hell
Blue sky from pain
Can you tell a green field
From a cold steel rail?
A smile from a veil?
Do you think you can tell?

Did they get you to trade
Your heroes for ghosts?
Hot ashes for trees?
Hot air for a cool breeze?
Cold comfort for change?
And did you exchange
A walk on part in the war
For a lead role in a cage?

How I wish, how I wish you were here
We're just two lost souls
Swimming in a fish bowl
Year after year
Running over the same old ground
What have we found
The same old fears
Wish you were here

%
